(98 kb)
Investments in Non-SLR instruments by State / Central Co-operative Banks
RBI/2016-17/14
DCBR.BPD.BC.No. 01/19.51.026/2016-17
Ashadha 23, 1938
July 14, 2016
All State / Central Co-operative Banks
Dear Sir / Madam,
Investments in Non-SLR instruments by State / Central Co-operative Banks
Please refer to our
circulars RPCD.CO.RF.BC.26/07.02.03/2005-06 dated August 4, 2005
and
DCBR.CO.RCBD.BC.No.5/19.51.026/2015-16 dated October 21, 2015
on the captioned subject.
2. With a view to providing greater flexibility to State and Central Co-operative Banks (StCBs/CCBs), the extant guidelines have been reviewed and it has been decided that StCBs/CCBs shall make investments in Non-SLR instruments subject to the following conditions:
2.1 Prudential Limit
Total Non-SLR investments shall not exceed 10% of the total deposits of a bank as on March 31 of the preceding financial year.
2.2 Instruments
StCBs / CCBs may invest in the following instruments:
(a) "A" or equivalent and higher rated Commercial Papers (CPs), debentures and bonds.
(b) Units of Debt Mutual Funds and Money Market Mutual Funds.
(c) Shares of Market Infrastructure Companies (MICs), e.g. Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL), National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI), Society for World-wide Inter-bank Financial Telecommunication (SWIFT).
2.3 Restrictions
(a) Investment in perpetual debt instruments is not permitted.
(b) Fresh investments in equity of All India Financial Institutions (AIFIs) will not be permitted. The existing share-holding in these institutions may be phased out over a period of three years and till the time such investments are held in the books of the bank, they will be reckoned as Non-SLR investments for the purpose of computing the limit prescribed at 2.1 above.
(c) Investment in units of Mutual Funds, other than units of Debt Mutual Funds and Money Market Mutual Funds, is not permitted. The existing investments in units of Mutual Funds other than Debt / Money Market Mutual Funds should be disinvested. Till the time such ineligible investments are held in the books of the bank, they will be reckoned as Non-SLR investments for the purpose of computing the limit prescribed at 2.1 above. The banks shall review their risk management policy and ensure that they do not have disproportionate exposure in any one scheme of a Mutual Fund.
(d) Investment in unlisted securities shall be subject to a minimum rating prescribed at 2.2(a) above and shall not exceed 10 percent of the total Non-SLR investments of a bank at any time. Where banks have already exceeded the said limit, no further investment in such securities shall be made. Investment in Non-SLR debt securities (both primary and secondary market) where the security is proposed to be listed on Stock Exchange(s) may be considered as investment in listed security at the time of making the investment. If such security is not listed subsequently within the period specified, the same will be reckoned for computing the 10 percent limit prescribed for unlisted Non-SLR securities. In case such investments under the unlisted Non-SLR securities lead to breach of 10 percent limit, the bank will not be allowed to make further investments in Non-SLR securities (both primary and secondary market) till such time its investment in unlisted securities is brought within the limit of 10 percent
(e) Investment in deep discount / zero coupon bonds shall be subject to the minimum rating as stated at 2.2(a) above and comparable market yields for the residual duration. No investment shall be made in zero coupon bonds unless the issuer has created a sinking fund for all accrued interest and keeps it invested in liquid instruments / securities (government bonds).
(f) Non-SLR investment, other than in units of Debt Mutual Funds and Money Market Mutual Funds, and CPs, shall be in instruments with an original maturity of over one year.
(g) All fresh investments under Non-SLR category shall be classified under “current” category only and marked to market as applicable to these categories of investments.
(h) All Non-SLR investments shall be subject to the prudential limits prescribed for single /group counter-party exposure.
(i) StCBs / CCBs may invest in Certificates of Deposits (CDs) issued by scheduled commercial banks (other than Regional Rural Banks and Local Area Banks) and select All-India Financial Institutions that have been permitted by RBI to raise short-term resources within the umbrella limit fixed by the Reserve Bank of India. Investment in CDs will be treated as inter-bank deposits and shall not be reckoned for computing the limit on Non-SLR investments prescribed at 2.1 above.
2.4 Policy
StCBs / CCBs shall review their investment policy and ensure that it is in compliance with the guidelines prescribed by the Reserve Bank of India. Banks shall put in place appropriate risk management systems for capturing and analysing the risk in respect of Non-SLR investments and taking remedial measures in time.
2.5 Review
The Boards of StCBs/ CCBs shall review the following aspects of Non-SLR investments at least at half-yearly intervals:
a) Total business (investment and divestment) during the reporting period.
b) Compliance with the prudential limits prescribed for non-SLR investment.
c) Compliance with the prudential guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank.
d) Rating migration of the issuers / issues held in the bank's books and consequent diminution in the portfolio quality.
e) Extent of non-performing investments in the non-SLR category and adequacy of provisions thereof.
2.6 Disclosure
StCBs / CCBs shall disclose details of issuer-wise composition of Non-SLR investments and non-performing investments in 'Notes on Accounts' in their balance sheet, as indicated in the
Annex
.
Yours faithfully,
(Reeny Ajith)
General Manager-in-Charge
Annex
Investments in Non-SLR instruments by State / Central Co-operative Banks –
Disclosure Requirements
StCBs / CCBs shall make the following disclosures in the 'Notes on Accounts' in the balance sheet in respect of their non-SLR investment portfolio:
(i) Issuer Composition of Non SLR Investments
(Rs. in lakh)
No
Issuer
Amount
Extent of 'Below Investment Grade' Securities
Extent of 'Unrated' Securities
Extent of 'Unlisted' Securities
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
1
PSUs
2
FIs
3
Public Sector Banks
4
Mutual Funds
5
Others
6
Provision held towards depreciation
(ii) Non Performing Non-SLR Investments
Particulars
Amount
(Rs. in lakh)
Opening balance
Additions during the year since 1st April
Reductions during the above period
Closing balance
Total provisions held