(82 kb)
StCBs/CCBs - Housing Sector: Innovative Housing Loan Products – Upfront disbursal of housing loans
RBI/2013-14/320
RPCD.CO.RCB.BC.No.43/07.51.013/2013-14
October 8, 2013
The Chairman
All State and Central Co-operative Banks  (StCBs and CCBs)
Dear Sir,
Housing Sector: Innovative Housing Loan Products  – Upfront disbursal of housing loans
It has been observed that some banks have  introduced certain innovative Housing Loan Schemes in association with  developers/builders, e.g. upfront disbursal of sanctioned individual housing  loans to the builders without linking the disbursals to various stages of  construction of housing project, interest/EMI on the housing loan availed of by  the individual borrower being serviced by the builders during the construction  period/specified period, etc. This might include signing of tripartite  agreements between the bank, the builder and the buyer of the housing unit.  These loan products are popularly known by various names like 80:20, 75:25  Schemes.
2. Such housing loan products are likely to  expose the banks as well as their home loan borrowers to additional risks e.g.  in case of disputes between individual borrowers and developers/builders,  default/delayed payment of interest/EMI by the developer/builder during the  agreed period on behalf of the borrower, non-completion of the project on time,  etc. Further, any delayed payments by developers/builders on behalf of  individual borrowers to banks may lead to lower credit rating/scoring of such  borrowers by credit information companies (CICs) as information about servicing  of loans gets passed on to the CICs on a regular basis. In cases where bank  loans are also disbursed upfront on behalf of their individual borrowers in a  lump-sum to builders/developers without any linkage to stages of construction,  banks run disproportionately higher exposures with concomitant risks of  diversion of funds.
3. In view of the higher risks associated with  such lump-sum disbursal of sanctioned housing loans and customer suitability  issues, StCBs and CCBs are advised that disbursal of housing loans sanctioned  to individuals should be closely linked to the stages of construction of the  housing project/houses and upfront disbursal should not be made in cases of  incomplete/under-construction/green field housing projects.
4. It is emphasized that StCBs / CCBs while  introducing any kind of product should take into account the customer  suitability and appropriateness issues and also ensure that the borrowers/  customers are made fully aware of the risks and liabilities under such  products.
Yours faithfully
(A. Udgata)
Principal Chief General  Manager