(150 kb)
RRBs - Sharing of Information Technology Resources by Banks - Guidelines
RBI/2013-14/335
RPCD.CO.RRB.BC.No. 45/03.05.33/2013-14
October 24, 2013
The Chairmen
All Regional Rural Banks
Dear Sir,
Sharing of Information Technology Resources by  Banks - Guidelines
Please refer to
paragraph 101
of the Monetary Policy Statement 2013-14  wherein the need for banks to examine the issue of shared IT resources to  optimise costs while maintaining the desired levels of efficiency and security  has been emphasised.
2. One of the pre-requisites for a bank to consume shared IT resources is the existence of a strong IT and IS Governance in the bank. It is imperative that decisions on IT resource sharing have necessary approvals of the management possibly at the board level depending on the criticality of the infrastructure or application to be shared. The applications that can be considered for sharing IT resources are those related to collaboration, housekeeping, office automation and business applications.
3. As a consumer, Regional Rural Banks may ensure that the service provider (including another bank) adheres to all  regulatory and legal requirements of the country. Regional Rural Banks may necessarily enter into agreement with the service provider that the infrastructure and applications are made available for audit / inspection by the regulators of the country. Reserve Bank of India and NABARD should have access to all information resources that are consumed by Regional Rural Banks, though the resources are not physically located in the premises of banks. Further, Regional Rural Banks have to adhere to the relevant legal and regulatory requirements relating to geographical location of infrastructure and movement of data out of borders.
4. While consuming services provided by other banks or service providers, it may be ensured that all aspects relating to  privacy, confidentiality, security and business continuity are fully met.
5. A document which may serve as guidance in this regard is
enclosed
.
6. Please acknowledge receipt of the letter to our concerned Regional Office.
Yours faithfully,
(A.Udgata)
Principal Chief General Manager
Sharing of Information Technology Resources by  Banks - Steps
1. Identify the asset(s) to be included:
Data
Applications/Functions/Process
2. Evaluate the asset on the following factors-
Determine how       important the data or function is to the bank
Analyse the impact of the scenarios
The asset        becoming widely public & widely distributed
An employee of        the service provider accessing the asset
The process or        function being manipulated by an outsider
The process or        function failing to provide expected results
The info/data        being unexpectedly changed
The asset being unavailable for a period of time
3. Choose the external organisation carefully:
A bank
An IT Company
Any other organization
4. Map Data Flow
Map the data       flow between bank, service provider, customers, other nodes
Essential to       understand whether data can move in/out of the shared infrastructure       provided by others
Sketch it for       each of the models
Know risk tolerance
5. Assess requirements
Infrastructure
Applications
6. Analyse the Security Concerns
Issues in       applications - Service levels, security, governance, compliance, liability       expectations of the service     provider are contractually defined
Issues in infrastructure - service provider handling  Infrastructure security
7. Prepare a service contract addressing the  following domains:
Architectural       Framework
Governance,       Enterprise Risk Management
Legal,       e-Discovery
Compliance &       Audit
Information       Lifecycle Management
Portability       & Interoperability
Security,       Business Continuity, Disaster Recovery
Data Center       Operations
Incident       Response Issues
Application       Security
Encryption &       Key Management
Identity &       Access Management
Virtualization
8. Understand the issues in security pitfalls
Geographical       location of Infrastructure
Scope network       security issues
Control Mechanism
9. Comprehend the overall security concerns
Handing over operational control to service  provider while maintaining accountability
10. General Governance issues
Identify,       implement process, controls to maintain effective governance, risk       management, compliance
Provider security governance should be assessed for  sufficiency, maturity, consistency with user ITSEC process
11. 3rd Party Governance issues
Request for       clear documentation on how facility & services are assessed
Requirement of       definition of what provider considers critical services, information
Perform full contract, terms of use due diligence to  determine roles, accountability
12. Analyse legal issues
Functional:       functions & services which have legal implications for both parties
Jurisdictional:       which governments administer laws and regulations impacting services,       stakeholders, data assets
Contractual:       terms & conditions
Clarity on       provider and consumer's roles
Litigation hold
e-Discovery       searches
Expert testimony
Provider must       save primary and secondary (logs) data
Location of       storage data
Plan for       unexpected contract termination and orderly return or secure disposal of       assets
Ensuring retention  of ownership of data in its original form
13. Examine compliance & audit function
Right to Audit       clause
Analyze       compliance scope
Regulatory       impact on data security
Evidence       requirements are met
Appropriate certification such as SAS 70 Type II, ISO  27001/2 audit statements
14. Study Information Lifecycle Management  especially in the context of
Data security
Data Location
All copies, backups stored only at location allowed by  contract, SLA and/or regulation
15. Analyse portability and interoperability
Factors       necessitating switching service providers
Negotiate       Contract price increase
Factor in       service provider bankruptcy and service shutdown
Decrease in       service quality
Business dispute
16. Understand security, business continuity,  disaster recovery related issues
Centralization       of data means greater insider threat from within the provider
Requirement of       onsite inspections of provider facilities
Disaster recovery, Business continuity, of service  provider etc.
17. Formulate appropriate Incident Response  systems
Applications may       not always be designed with data integrity, security in mind
Necessity to       store keep application, firewall, IDS etc. logs
Management of snapshots of virtual environment
18. Plan application security
Different trust       boundaries for various types of shared resources
Ensure web       application security
Secure inter-host communication channel
19. Devise encryption, key management procedures
Encrypt data in       transit, at rest, backup media
Secure key store
Protect       encryption keys
Ensure       encryption is based on industry/government standards
Limit access to       key stores
Key backup &       recoverability
Test these procedures
20. Manage ID, access control
Determine how       service provider handles provisioning, de-provisioning
Authentication
Federation
Authorization
User profile management
21. Plan virtualization
Type of       virtualization
3rd party security technology augmenting virtual OS  controls that protect admin interfaces