(668 kb)
Second Quarter Review of Monetary Policy 2013-14
By
Dr. Raghuram G. Rajan
Governor
Part A. Monetary Po
licy
Monetary and Liquidity Measures
Following an assessment of the evolving  macroeconomic situation, the Reserve Bank has decided to:
reduce the marginal standing facility (MSF)  rate by 25 basis points from 9.0 per cent to 8.75 per cent with immediate  effect;
increase the policy repo rate under the  liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) by 25 basis points from 7.5  per cent to 7.75 per cent with immediate  effect
keep cash reserve ratio (CRR) unchanged at  4.0 per cent of net demand and time liability (NDTL); and
increase the liquidity provided through term  repos of 7-day and 14-day tenor from 0.25 per cent of NDTL of the banking  system to 0.5 per cent with immediate effect.
Consequently, the reverse repo rate under the LAF  stands adjusted to 6.75 per cent and the Bank Rate stands reduced to 8.75 per  cent with immediate effect. With these changes, the MSF rate and the Bank Rate  are recalibrated to 100 basis points above the repo rate.
Assessment
2.  Since  the Mid-Quarter Review in September, the outlook for global growth has improved  modestly, with fiscal concerns abating in the US and lead indicators of  activity firming up in the Euro area and the UK.
3.  In  emerging and developing economies, the prospect of delay in the taper of the  Federal Reserve’s bond purchases has brought calm to financial markets, and  capital flows have resumed. Nevertheless, headwinds to growth from domestic  constraints continue to pose downside risks, and vulnerabilities to sudden  shifts in the external environment remain.
4.  In  India, industrial activity has weakened, with a contraction in consumer  durables and tepid growth in capital goods reflecting the ongoing downturn in  both consumption and investment demand. Strengthening export growth and signs  of revival in some services, along with the expected pick-up in agriculture,  could support an increase in growth in the second half of 2013-14 relative to  the first half, raising real GDP growth from 4.4 per cent in Q1 to a central  estimate of 5.0 per cent for the year as a whole (
Chart 1
). The revival of  large stalled projects and the pipeline cleared by the Cabinet Committee on  Investment may buoy investment and overall activity towards the close of the  year.
5.  In  the meantime, with many large entities holding back on payments, liquidity  pressures are building up on small and medium enterprises. A number are facing  conditions of financial distress. Remedies partly lie in the speed-up of  government and public sector payments, and on measures to channel credit to  small and medium enterprises.
6.  Inflation measured by the wholesale  price index (WPI) rose in September for the fourth month in succession. The  pass-through of rupee depreciation into prices of manufactured products is  acting, along with elevated food and fuel inflation, to offset possible  disinflationary effects of low growth. While food price pressures may ease with  the arrival of the
kharif
harvest and the usual seasonal moderation,  overall WPI inflation is expected to remain higher than current levels through  most of the remaining part of the year (
Chart 2
), warranting an appropriate  policy response.
7. Retail inflation measured  by the consumer price index (CPI) has also risen sharply across food and  non-food constituents, including services, keeping inflation expectations high.  Notwithstanding the expected edging down of food inflation, retail inflation is  likely to remain around or even above 9 per cent (
Chart 3
) in the months ahead,  absent policy action.
8. Liquidity management has been calibrated  to the system’s requirements arising from the sharp pick-up in credit relative  to deposit growth and festival-related demand for currency. Liquidity up to 0.5  per cent of bank-wise NDTL is available through overnight LAF repos.  Furthermore, export credit refinance of up to 50 per cent of eligible export  credit outstanding amounts to approximately 0.5 per cent of system-level NDTL.  To provide market participants with additional access to primary liquidity, as  well as greater flexibility in managing reserve requirements, term repos of  7-day and 14-day tenor have been introduced to provide liquidity 
      equivalent to 0.25 per cent of NDTL. As a result of the measures taken by the  Reserve Bank to ease liquidity, the average drawal on the MSF has declined  significantly from about
`
1.4 trillion in  mid-September to
`
0.4 trillion by  mid-October, and money market rates have fallen by 125 basis points. Going  forward, however, the more durable strategy for mitigating mismatches between  the supply of, and demand for, funds is for banks to step up efforts to  mobilise deposits.
9. As regards the external sector, the  improvement in export performance over the last two months, coupled with the  contraction in non-oil import demand, has enabled a perceptible narrowing of  the trade deficit with favourable implications for the current account deficit  (CAD) going forward. Policy interventions have bridged the external financing  gap. These factors have brought some calm to the foreign exchange market.  However, normalcy will be restored to the exchange market only when the demand  for dollars from public sector oil marketing companies is fully returned to the  market.
Policy Stance  and Rationale
10.  From September, as steps to contain the  CAD started taking effect in an improving external environment, volatility in  the foreign exchange market ebbed and it became possible to unwind the  exceptional liquidity tightening measures. Keeping in view the need to infuse  liquidity into the system to normalise liquidity conditions, term repos will  now be conducted for a total notified amount equivalent to 0.5 per cent of NDTL  of the banking system. In addition, the MSF rate will be reduced by 25 basis  points.
11.  With the more recent upturn of inflation,  and with inflation expectations remaining elevated anticipating the  pass-through of exchange rate depreciation and ongoing adjustment in  administered fuel prices, it is important to break the spiral of rising price  pressures in order to curb the erosion of financial saving and strengthen the  foundations of growth. It is in this context that the LAF repo rate has been  increased by 25 basis points.
12.  With the reduction of the MSF rate and the  increase in the repo rate in this review, the process of re-aligning the  interest rate corridor to normal monetary policy operations is now complete.
13.  The policy stance and measures in this  review are intended to curb mounting inflationary pressures and manage  inflation expectations in a situation of weak growth. These will help  strengthen the environment for growth by fostering macroeconomic and financial  stability. The Reserve Bank will closely monitor inflation risk while being  mindful of the evolving growth dynamics.
Mid-Quarter  Review of Monetary Policy 2013-14
14.  The next Mid-Quarter Review of Monetary  Policy for 2013-14 will be announced through a press release on Wednesday,  December 18, 2013.
Third Quarter  Review of Monetary Policy 2013-14
15. The Third Quarter Review of Monetary Policy for 2013-14 is  scheduled on Tuesday, January 28, 2014.
Part  B. Developmental and Regulatory Policies
16.  This  part of the Statement reviews the progress on various developmental and  regulatory policy measures announced by the Reserve Bank in recent policy  statements and also sets out new measures.
17.   The  Reserve   Bank’s developmental measures over the next few quarters will be built  on five pillars. These are:
a. Clarifying  and strengthening the
monetary policy framework.
b. Strengthening
banking structure
through new entry, branch expansion, encouraging new  varieties of banks, and moving foreign banks into better regulated  organisational forms.
c. Broadening  and deepening
financial markets
and increasing their liquidity and resilience  so that they can help absorb the risks entailed in financing India’s growth.
d. Expanding  access to finance to small and medium enterprises, the unorganised sector, the  poor, and remote and underserved areas of the country through measures to  foster
financial inclusion
.
e. Improving  the system’s ability to
deal with corporate distress and financial  institution distress
by strengthening real and financial restructuring as  well as debt recovery.
18.  Action on the monetary policy framework will follow  the submission of the Dr. Urjit Patel Committee report. A number of measures to  strengthen bank structures and financial markets have already been announced,  and more will follow as they are worked out. The strategy to expand financial  inclusion will be informed by the Dr. Nachiket Mor Committee report, though  significant efforts to explore the use of technology are already underway.  Finally, some steps to improve restructuring and recovery will be announced  soon.
I. Developments and Policies: Banking Structure
Basel III Regulation on Countercyclical Capital Buffer
19.  As part  of the Basel III capital framework, an internal Working Group (Chairman: Shri  B. Mahapatra) was constituted to operationalise the countercyclical capital  buffer framework in India. It is proposed to:
place the draft report of the group on the Reserve  Bank’s website by end-November 2013 for inviting comments/suggestions from  various stakeholders.
Framework for Dealing with Domestic Systemically  Important Banks
20.  The  Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) provided a framework for dealing  with domestic systemically important banks (D-SIBs) in October 2012. The D-SIBs  framework is principle-based and provides broad guidance to national authorities  on assessment of the systemic importance of banks and additional capital  requirements of D-SIBs. It is proposed to:
place a draft of the proposed framework for D-SIBs on  the Reserve Bank’s website by end-November 2013.
Guidelines on Stress Testing
21.  The  Reserve Bank had issued guidelines on stress testing in June 2007. These  guidelines required banks to have a sound stress testing policy which will  determine liquidity risk, interest rate risk, credit risk and foreign exchange  risk under stressed scenarios. Drawing from the BCBS principles on the subject  and subsequent global developments, it is proposed to:
issue updated guidelines on stress testing by  end-November 2013.
Unhedged Foreign Currency Exposures of Corporates
22.  Unhedged  foreign currency exposures of corporates are a cause for concern as they pose a  risk to individual corporates as also to the entire financial system. Based on  feedback received from industry participants, it is proposed to:
issue final guidelines on unhedged foreign currency  exposures by end-December 2013.
Periodicity of Payment of Interest on Rupee  Savings/Term Deposits
23.  As per  extant instructions, banks are required to pay interest on savings deposits and  term deposits at quarterly or longer intervals. As all commercial banks are now  on core banking platforms, it has been decided to:
give banks the option to pay interest on savings  deposits and term deposits at intervals shorter than quarterly intervals.
Licensing of New Banks in the Private Sector - Constitution  of High Level Advisory Committee
24.  In terms  of the guidelines for licensing of new banks in the private sector released on  February 22, 2013 applications will be screened by the Reserve Bank to ensure
prima
facie
eligibility, and thereafter, the applications will be referred to  a High Level Advisory Committee (HLAC). The HLAC will devise its own procedures  for screening the applications and submit its recommendations to the Reserve  Bank for consideration. The decision to issue an
in-principle
approval  for setting up of a bank will be taken by the Reserve Bank whose decision in  this regard will be final.
25.  The HLAC  has been set up under the Chairmanship of Dr. Bimal Jalan, former Governor of  the Reserve Bank with Smt. Usha Thorat, former Deputy Governor of the Reserve  Bank, Shri C.B. Bhave, former Chairman, Securities and Exchange Board of  India (SEBI) and Dr. Nachiket M. Mor, Director, Central Board of Directors of  the Reserve Bank as members. The Committee will hold its first meeting on  November 1, 2013.
Mode of Presence of Foreign Banks in India – Scheme of  Subsidiarisation
26.  As a  sequel to the roadmap for presence of foreign banks in India released by the  Reserve Bank in 2005 and pursuant to the announcement made in the Monetary  Policy Statement of April 2010, the Reserve Bank released a Discussion Paper on  the presence of foreign banks in India on January 21, 2011 factoring in the  lessons from the crisis which favoured a subsidiary mode of presence from a  financial stability perspective. Taking into account the feedback received from  stakeholders, a scheme of subsidiarisation of foreign banks in India, guided by  the two cardinal principles of reciprocity and single mode of presence, is  being finalised. The Wholly Owned Subsidiaries (WOSs) would be given  near-national treatment, including in the opening of branches.
27.  While it  will not be mandatory for existing foreign banks (
i.e.
, banks set up  before August 2010) to convert into WOSs, they will be incentivised to convert  into WOSs by the attractiveness of the near-national treatment afforded to  WOSs. The initial minimum paid-up voting equity capital or net worth for a WOS  shall be
`
5 billion. It is proposed:
to issue the Scheme by mid-November 2013.
II. Developments and Policies: Financial Markets
Retail Inflation Indexed Securities
28.  The  Union Budget, 2013-14 proposed to introduce instruments that will protect  savings from inflation and provide an alternative to gold as an investment  avenue for individuals. Inflation indexed securities for retail investors of  10-year tenor would be linked to the new (combined) consumer price index.  Eligible investors would consist of individuals, hindu undivided families  (HUFs), trusts and charitable institutions. The rate of interest on these  securities would comprise of a fixed rate plus inflation. Interest would be  compounded half-yearly and paid cumulatively at redemption. These securities  will be distributed through banks to reach out to the masses. Accordingly, it  is proposed to:
launch Inflation Indexed National Saving Securities  (IINSSs) for retail investors in November/December 2013 in consultation with  the Government of India.
Cash Settled 10-year Interest Rate Futures Contracts
29.  In order to develop the money and government securities  markets, it has been decided to introduce cash settled 10-year Interest Rate  Futures (IRF) contracts. Product design and operational modalities are being  discussed with all stakeholders, including market bodies and stock exchanges,  and after taking into account their feedback, the Reserve Bank, in consultation  with the SEBI, would:
issue guidelines by mid-November 2013 and the product  is expected to be launched by the exchanges by end-December 2013.
Credit Enhancements in Corporate Bonds
30.  The  corporate bond market in India currently lacks sufficient depth and liquidity.  As a result, corporates have significant dependence on bank financing.  Therefore, it is proposed to:
allow banks to offer partial credit enhancements to  corporate bonds  by way of providing  credit facilities and liquidity facilities to the corporates, and not by way of  guarantee. Detailed guidelines in this regard will be issued separately.
Revision in the Timing of Marginal Standing Facility
31.  With a  view to facilitating settlement of electronic funds transfers as well as to  reduce unnecessary volatility in reserve maintenance, it has been decided to:
revise the timing of MSF operations. With effect from  November 5, 2013 they will be conducted between 7.00 pm and 7.30 pm instead of  between 4.45 pm and 5.15 pm.
Repo Facility for Mutual Funds
32. On July  17, 2013 the Reserve Bank had opened a special repo window for mutual funds  with a view to enabling banks to meet the liquidity requirements of mutual  funds. With the normalisation of exceptional measures and taking into  consideration the improvement in liquidity conditions since then, it has been  decided to close this window with immediate effect.
Technical Committee on Services / Facilities for  Exporters
33.   Some  recommendations of the Technical Committee on Services/Facilities to Exporters  (Chairman:
Shri G. Padmanabhan) such as an increase in the limit of e-commerce  transactions and extending the time period for submission of documents under  project exports, simplification of reporting requirement of forward contracts  booked over-the-counter (OTC) and extending the limit for exporters to cancel  and rebook the forward contracts have been accepted and necessary guidelines  have been issued. Other recommendations are being analysed in coordination with  government agencies/other stakeholders for implementation.
III.  Developments and Policies: Financial Inclusion and
Payment and Settlement Systems
General Credit Card Scheme
34.  The  coverage of the General Credit Card (GCC) Scheme is being revised to enhance  credit linkage of individuals to all non-farm entrepreneurial activities within  the rubric of the overall priority sector. It is expected that the revised  scheme will give a fillip to flow of credit to small businesses and low income  households. Detailed guidelines in this regard will be issued before  mid-November 2013.
Roadmap for Provision of Banking Services in Unbanked  Villages
35.  State  Level Bankers’ Committees are mandated to prepare a roadmap covering all  unbanked villages of population less than 2000 and to notionally allot these  villages to banks for providing banking services. Accordingly, about 4,90,000  unbanked villages have been identified and allotted to various banks to be  covered by March 2016.
Rural Co-operatives: Streamlining of Short-Term  Co-operative Credit Structure
36.  In  January 2013, the Reserve Bank constituted an Expert Committee (Chairman: Dr.  Prakash Bakshi) on the short-term co-operative credit structure. The  recommendations taken up for implementation include,
inter alia
,  improvement of governance and management of rural co-operatives, moving to Core  Banking Solutions (CBSs) and setting up of a Working Group to examine human  resources requirement of rural co-operative banks following the transition of  state  co-operative banks and district  central co-operative banks to CBS.
Customer Service - Charges Levied by Banks for Sending  SMS Alerts
37.  With a view to ensuring reasonableness and equity in the  charges levied by banks for sending SMS alerts to customers, banks are advised  to leverage the technology available with them and the telecom service  providers to ensure that such charges are levied on all customers on actual  usage basis.
Payment and Settlement Systems Electronic Bill Payments  System - GIRO Advisory Group
38.  Following  the report of the Committee for Implementation of GIRO Based Payment System  highlighting the need for an electronic bill payment system based on a GIRO  model for payment of dues of essential services, insurance premia, utility  payments, taxes, university fees, examination fees and the like, a GIRO  Advisory Group (Chairman: Prof. Umesh Bellur) has been constituted with  representation from banks and other stakeholders. The Group is expected to  submit its report by end-December 2013.
Technical Committee on Expansion of Access to Mobile  Banking
39.  A  Technical Committee (Chairman: Shri B. Sambamurthy) has been constituted to  examine various options/alternatives, including the feasibility of encrypted  SMS-based funds transfer using an application which can run on any type of  handset, for expansion of mobile banking in the country. The Committee is  expected to submit its report by end-December 2013.
Security and Risk Mitigation  Measures for Card Present and Electronic Payment Transactions
40.  The  Reserve Bank has advised banks to put in place by end-June 2013 security  features in order to secure card transactions and the electronic banking  infrastructure. A review of banks’ preparedness in this regard indicates that  technical glitches are hampering the transition to the desired environment.  Accordingly, a one-time extension has been granted to stakeholders.
Cash Pay-out from Prepaid Payment Instruments Issued  by Non-bank Entities
41.  In order  to further popularise prepaid payment instruments (PPIs) and facilitate  remittance of funds by people not having bank accounts, a pilot is being  planned with select non-bank PPI issuers to study the technological and  operational feasibility of allowing cash pay-out (remittance) from PPIs issued  by non-bank entities using Aadhaar based bio-metric authentication. The broad  technical, operational and functional parameters of the pilot are being  finalised in consultation with participants and the pilot is expected to go  live before end-March 2014.
IV.  Restructuring
Non-Banking Financial Companies  (NBFCs): Restructuring Guidelines
42.  The Reserve Bank’s Working Group (Chairman: Shri  B. Mahapatra) reviewed prudential guidelines on restructuring of advances by  banks and financial institutions and relevant guidelines to banks have been  issued. As NBFCs are also part of the financial institutions that lend to the  sectors where restructuring benefits are now available, either as part of a  consortium or otherwise, it has been decided to:
review the extant instructions on restructuring for  NBFCs and issue guidelines in the matter by end-November 2013.
V.  Institutional and Other Developments
Recommendations of the Financial Sector Legislative Reforms Commission  (FSLRC)
43. It is  proposed to implement the following recommendations of the FSLRC pertaining to  consumer protection and capacity building:
All instructions relating to consumer  services/consumer protection would be consolidated and will be placed on the  Reserve Bank’s website as a single group of instructions by end-March 2014 and  they will be examined for gaps, if any.
A Committee will be set up by the Reserve Bank to  examine capacity building, including basic and job specific knowledge  requirements and examine whether a system of formal certification is warranted  for certain job descriptions within the Reserve Bank and in the financial  entities and market segments regulated by it.
The Reserve Bank will examine its own public facing  services and institute time-bound response guidelines where feasible and not  already in place. Such guidelines will be placed on the Reserve Bank’s website  by January 2014.
Currency Management: Distribution of Banknotes and  Coins
44.  Banks  were advised to explore the possibility of meeting the growing demand for  banknotes and coins in the country through Business Correspondents (BCs) and  consider engaging the services of Cash in Transit (CIT) entities to address  last mile connectivity issues. Instructions have been issued on September 10  and October 10, 2013, permitting banks to include distribution of banknotes and  coins in the scope of activities which may be undertaken by BCs/CITs.
45.  Banks  have also enhanced their     capacity to take over the retail function  of distribution of notes and coins and adjudication of mutilated notes. They  have so far     identified 
      805 bank branches for the purpose. Correspondingly, the distribution level  across the Reserve Bank’s counters has decreased by 61 per cent and 64 per cent  for notes and coins, respectively, and the adjudication of notes by 51 per  cent.
Detection and Reporting of Counterfeit Banknotes
46.  In view  of the recommendation of the Department-related Parliament Standing Committee  (DPSC) to introduce a scheme of incentives in order to encourage banks to  report counterfeit notes detected by them, instructions were issued to banks on  June 27, 2013 on the procedure to be followed and compensation to banks for  detection of counterfeit notes and penalty for non-detection/reporting thereof.
Mumbai
October 29,  2013