(410 kb)
Prudential Norms on Income Recognition, Asset Classification and Provisioning pertaining to Advances – Credit Card Accounts
RBI/2013-14/414
DBOD.No.BP.BC.78/21.04.048/2013-14
December 20, 2013
The  Chairman and Managing Director/
Chief Executive Officer of
All Scheduled Commercial Banks
Dear Sir,
Prudential Norms on Income  Recognition, Asset Classification and
Provisioning  pertaining to Advances – Credit Card Accounts
Please refer to
paragraph 2.1
of the Master  Circular dated July 01, 2013 on Prudential Norms on  Income Recognition, Asset Classification and Provisioning pertaining to  Advances, wherein definitions of non-performing assets (NPAs) have been  indicated.
2. In credit card accounts, the amount spent is  billed to the card users through a monthly statement with a definite due date for  repayment. Banks give an option to the card users to pay either the full amount  or a fraction of it, i.e., minimum amount due, on the due date and roll-over  the balance amount to the subsequent months’ billing cycle.
3. It has come to our notice that there are divergent practices being followed by banks with regard to asset  classification status of credit card accounts if minimum amount due is not paid  on the specified due date. While some banks reckon the due date specified in  the statement for payment of minimum amount due to determine the over-due  status, some banks reckon the subsequent billing date to determine the over-due  status of the minimum amount due. In order to bring in consistency and induce  transparency, it is advised that a credit card account will be treated as  non-performing asset if the minimum amount due, as mentioned in the statement,  is not paid fully within 90 days from the next statement date. The gap between  two statements should not be more than a month.
4. Banks should follow this  uniform method of determining over-due status for credit card accounts while  reporting to credit information companies and for the purpose of levying of  penal charges, viz. late payment charges, etc., if any.
Yours faithfully,
(Chandan Sinha)
Principal Chief General Manager