(21 kb)
Issue of Non convertible/ redeemable bonus preference shares or debentures - Clarifications
RBI/2013-2014/428
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.84
January 6 , 2014
To
All Category - I Authorised  Dealer banks
Madam/Sir,
Issue of Non convertible/ redeemable bonus preference shares or  debentures - Clarifications
Attention of Authorised  Dealers Category- I (AD Category-I) banks is invited to Regulation (2ii) and  Regulation 5 of the Foreign Exchange Management (Transfer or Issue of Security  by a Person Resident outside India) Regulations, 2000 notified vide
Notification  No.FEMA.20/2000 -RB dated May 3, 2000
, as amended from time to time, in  terms of which equity shares, compulsorily and mandatorily convertible  preference shares and compulsorily and mandatorily convertible debentures are  treated as a part of share capital for the purpose of Foreign Direct Investment.
2. Reserve Bank of India has been receiving references  from some Indian companies regarding issue of non-convertible/ redeemable bonus  preference shares or debentures to non-resident shareholders from the general  reserve under a Scheme of Arrangement by a Court, under the provisions of the  Companies Act, as applicable. So far, Reserve Bank has been granting permission  for such issuances on a case-to-case basis. On a review and with a view to  rationalizing and simplifying the procedures, it has been decided that an  Indian company may issue non-convertible/redeemable preference shares or debentures  to non-resident shareholders, including the depositories that act as trustees  for the ADR/GDR holders, by way of distribution as bonus from its general  reserves under a Scheme of Arrangement approved by a Court in India under the  provisions of the Companies Act, as applicable, subject to no-objection from  the Income Tax Authorities.
3. The above general permission to Indian  companies is only for issue of non-convertible/ redeemable preference shares or  debentures to non-resident shareholders by way of distribution as bonus from the  general reserves. The issue of  preference shares(excluding non-convertible/redeemable  preference shares) and convertible debentures (excluding optionally convertible/partially convertible debentures) under the FDI scheme would continue to be subject to
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular Nos.73
and
74
dated June 8, 2007 as hitherto.
4. Reserve Bank of  India  has since amended the Regulations and  notified vide
Notification  No.FEMA.291/2013-RB dated October 4, 2013
notified vide G.S.R. No.818 (E)  dated December 31, 2013.
5. AD Category - I banks may bring the contents  of the circular to the notice of their constituents concerned.
6.
The directions  contained in this circular have been issued under Sections 10(4) and 11(1) of  the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and are without  prejudice to permissions / approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(Rudra Narayan Kar)
Chief General Manager-in-Charge