(36 kb)
Foreign Direct Investment- Pricing Guidelines for FDI instruments with optionality clauses
RBI/2013-2014/436
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 86
January 9, 2014
All Category - I  Authorised Dealer banks
Madam/Sir,
Foreign Direct Investment- Pricing Guidelines for  FDI instruments with optionality clauses
Attention of Authorised  Dealers is invited to the Foreign Exchange Management (Transfer or Issue of  Security by a Person Resident outside India) Regulations, 2000 notified vide
Notification No. FEMA 20 / 2000 -RB dated May 3,  2000
as  amended from time to time. In terms of the extant instructions, only equity  shares or  preference shares/debentures  are eligible to be issued to persons resident outside India under the Foreign  Direct Investment Scheme in terms of Regulation 5 (1) of Foreign Exchange  Management (Transfer and Issue of shares by a Person Resident outside India)  Regulations, 2000 notified vide Notification No. FEMA 20/2000-RB dated May 3,  2000.
2. On a review, it has now been decided that optionality clauses may  henceforth be allowed in equity shares and compulsorily and  mandatorily convertible preference shares/debentures to be issued to a person resident outside India  under the Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) Scheme. The optionality clause will  oblige the buy-back of securities from the investor at the price  prevailing/value determined at the time of exercise of the optionality so as to  enable the investor to exit without any assured return. The provision of  optionality clause shall be subject to the following conditions:
(a) There is  a minimum lock-in period of one year or a minimum lock-in period as prescribed  under FDI Regulations, whichever is higher (e.g. defence and construction  development sector where the lock-in period of three years has been  prescribed). The lock-in period shall be effective from the date of allotment  of such shares or convertible debentures or as prescribed for defence and  construction development sectors, etc. in Annex B to Schedule 1 of Notification  No. FEMA. 20 as amended from time to time;
(b) After  the lock-in period, as applicable above, the non-resident investor exercising  option/right shall be eligible to exit without any assured return, as under:
(i) In case of a listed company, the  non-resident investor shall be eligible to exit at the market price prevailing  at the recognised stock exchanges;
(ii) In case of unlisted company, the  non-resident investor shall be eligible to exit from the investment in equity  shares of the investee company at a price not exceeding that arrived at on the  basis of Return on Equity (RoE) as per the latest audited balance sheet. Any  agreement permitting return linked to equity as above shall not be treated as  violation of FDI policy/FEMA Regulations.
Note: For the above purpose, RoE shall mean Profit After Tax / Net  Worth; Net Worth would include all free reserves and paid up capital.
(iii) Investments in Compulsorily Convertible  Debentures (CCDs) and Compulsorily  Convertible Preference Shares (CCPS) of  an investee company may be transferred at a price worked out as per any  internationally accepted pricing methodology at the time of exit duly certified  by a Chartered Accountant or a SEBI registered Merchant Banker. The guiding  principle would be that the non-resident investor is not guaranteed any assured  exit price at the time of making such investment/agreement and shall exit at  the price prevailing at the time of exit, subject to lock-in period  requirement, as applicable.
3. Reserve Bank has since amended the Regulations and the changes have been  notified vide
Notification No. FEMA. 294/2013-RB  dated November 12, 2013
vide G.S.R.  No. 805(E) dated December 30, 2013.
4. All existing contracts will have to comply with the above conditions to  qualify as FDI compliant.
5. AD Category - I banks may bring the contents of the circular to the notice  of their constituents concerned.
6. The directions contained in this circular have been issued under Sections  10(4) and 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and  are without prejudice to permissions / approvals, if any, required under any  other law.
Yours faithfully,
(Rudra Narayan Kar)
Chief General Manager In-Charge