(153 kb)
Memorandum of Instructions for Opening and Maintenance of Rupee / Foreign Currency Vostro Accounts of Non-resident Exchange Houses
RBI/2013-14/438
A.  P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 88
January 09, 2014
To,
All Authorised Dealer Category - I Banks
Madam / Sir,
Memorandum of Instructions for Opening  and Maintenance of Rupee / Foreign
Currency Vostro Accounts of Non-resident Exchange Houses
Attention  of Authorised Dealer Category – I (AD Category – I) banks is invited to Part  (B) of
Annex-I
to the A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 28 [A. P. (FL/RL Series) Circular No. 02]  dated February 6, 2008 on the captioned subject, as amended from time to time.
2. With a view to expanding the scope of  the Rupee Drawing Arrangements (RDAs), it has been decided to include  additional items under
Permitted  Transactions under RDAs. The amended  instructions under
Part (B) of Annex-I
to the above mentioned circular are as given in the
Annex
.
3. All other instructions issued vide A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 28 [A. P. (FL/RL Series)  Circular No. 02] dated  February 6, 2008, as amended from time to time, will remain unchanged.
4. AD Category - I banks may bring the  contents of this circular to the notice of their constituents concerned.
5. The directions contained in this circular have been issued  under Section 10(4) and Section 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act,  1999 (42 of 1999) and are without prejudice to permissions / approvals, if any,  required under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(Rudra Narayan Kar)
Chief  General Manager-in-Charge
Annex
[Annex-I  to A.P.(DIR Series) Circular No.28
A.P.(FL/RL Series) Circular No.02]
Earlier    guidelines under
Part (B) Permitted    Transactions
of Annex-I
Revised    guidelines under
Part (B) Permitted    Transactions
of Annex-I
Drawing    Arrangements with Exchange Houses are primarily designed to channel  inward    personal remittances.
Under no circumstances, donations / contributions to    charitable institutions should be routed through the Exchange Houses
. The
              following    is the list of permissible transactions under Drawing Arrangements with Exchange    Houses.
1.    Credit to Non-resident (External) Rupee accounts maintained by   Non-resident    Indians in Indian Rupees.
2.    Payments to families of Non-resident Indians.
3.    Payments in favour of Insurance companies, Mutual Funds and the  Post    Master for premia / investments.
4.    Payments in favour of bankers for investments in shares,  debentures.
5.    Payment to Coop. Housing Societies, Govt. Housing Schemes or    Estate    Developers for acquisition of residential flats in India in    individual    names subject to compliance of regulations thereof by  the    Non-resident Indians.
6.    Payments of tuition/ boarding, examination fee etc. to schools,  colleges    and other educational institutions.
7.    Payments to medical institutions and hospitals for medical             treatment    of NRIs / their dependents and nationals of Gulf Countries    in India.
8.    Payments to hotels by nationals of Gulf countries / NRIs for their  stay.
9.    Payments to travel agents for booking of passages of NRIs and    their    families residing in India towards their travel in India by    domestic    airlines / rail, etc.
10. Trade transactions up to Rs. 2    lakhs per transaction.
Drawing    Arrangements with Exchange Houses are primarily designed to channel  inward    personal remittances.
Under no circumstances, donations / contributions to    charitable institutions should be routed through the Exchange Houses
. The  following    is the list of permissible transactions under Drawing Arrangements with Exchange    Houses.
1.    Credit to Non-resident (External) Rupee accounts maintained by  Non-resident    Indians in Indian Rupees.
2.    Payments to families of Non-resident Indians.
3.    Payments in favour of Insurance companies, Mutual Funds and the  Post    Master for premia / investments.
4.    Payments in favour of bankers for investments in shares,          debentures.
5.    Payment to Coop. Housing Societies, Govt. Housing Schemes or    Estate    Developers for acquisition of residential flats in India in    individual    names subject to compliance of regulations thereof by  the    Non-resident Indians.
6.    Payments of tuition/ boarding, examination fee etc. to schools,  colleges    and other educational institutions.
7.    Payments to medical institutions and hospitals for medical 
              treatment    of NRIs / their dependents and nationals of Gulf 
            Countries    in India.
8.    Payments to hotels by nationals of Gulf countries / NRIs for their  stay.
9.    Payments to travel agents for booking of passages of NRIs and    their    families residing in India towards their travel in India by domestic    airlines / rail, etc.
10. Trade transactions up to Rs. 2    lakhs per transaction.
11. Payments to utility service    providers in India, for services such as water supply, electricity supply,    telephone (except for mobile top-ups), internet, television etc.
12. Tax payments in India
13. EMI payments in India to Banks    and Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs) for repayment of loans.