(206 kb)
Provisions under section 6 (4) of Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 - Clarifications
RBI/2013-14/440
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 90
January 9, 2014
To,
All Category- I Authorised Dealer  Banks and Authorised Banks
Madam / Sir,
Provisions  under section 6 (4) of Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 - Clarifications
Attention  of Authorized Dealers is invited to Section 6 (4) of FEMA, 1999 in terms of  which a person resident in India may hold, own, transfer or invest in foreign  currency, foreign security or any immovable property situated outside India if  such currency, security or property was acquired, held or owned by such person  when he was resident outside India or inherited from a person who was resident  outside India.
2.  We have been receiving representations with regards to nature of transactions  covered under Section 6(4) of FEMA, 1999. In this regard it is clarified that  Section 6(4) of FEMA, 1999 covers the following transactions:
Foreign currency accounts opened and  maintained by such a person when he was resident outside India;
Income earned through employment or business  or vocation outside India taken up or commenced while such person was resident  outside India, or from investments made while such person was resident outside  India, or from gift or inheritance received while such a person was resident  outside India;
Foreign exchange including any income arising  therefrom, and conversion or replacement or accrual to the same, held outside  India by a person resident in India acquired by way of inheritance from a  person resident outside India.
A person resident in India may freely utilise  all their eligible assets abroad as well as income on such assets or sale  proceeds thereof received after their return to India for making any payments  or to make any fresh investments abroad without approval of Reserve Bank, provided  the cost of such investments and/ or any subsequent payments received therefor  are met exclusively out of funds forming part of eligible assets held by them  and the transaction is not in contravention to extant FEMA provisions.
3. Authorised Dealer Category – I banks may bring the contents of  this circular to the notice of their constituents and customers concerned.
4. The directions contained in this circular have been issued under  Section 10(4) and Section 11(1) of the FEMA, 1999 (42 of 1999) and are without  prejudice to permissions/approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(Rudra Narayan Kar)
Chief  General Manager-in- Charge