(79 kb)
Capital and Provisioning Requirements for Exposures to entities with Unhedged Foreign Currency Exposure
RBI/2013-14/448
DBOD.No.BP.BC.  85 /21.06.200/2013-14
January  15, 2014
The  Chairman and Managing Director/
Chief  Executive Officer
All  Scheduled Commercial Banks
(Excluding  RRBs and LABs)
Dear Sir,
Capital  and Provisioning Requirements for Exposures to entities with Unhedged Foreign Currency Exposure
Please refer to the draft guidelines on the captioned  subject issued on July 2, 2013 and paragraph 22 of second quarter review of the  monetary policy announced on October 29, 2013 (
extract enclosed
). Unhedged  foreign currency exposures of the entities
1
are an area of concern not only for individual entity but also to the entire  financial system; entities who do not  hedge their foreign currency exposures can incur significant losses due to  exchange rate movements. These losses may reduce their capacity to service the  loans taken from the banking system and thereby affect the health of the  banking system.
2. We have issued various guidelines advising banks to closely monitor the  unhedged foreign currency exposures of their borrowing clients and also factor  this risk into the pricing. However, the extent of unhedged foreign currency  exposures of the entities continues to be significant and this can increase the  probability of default in times of high currency volatility. It has, therefore,  been decided to introduce incremental provisioning and capital requirements for  bank exposures to entities with unhedged foreign currency exposures. For calculating the incremental  provisioning and capital requirements, the following methodology may be  followed:
a. Ascertain the amount of Unhedged  Foreign Currency Exposure (UFCE):
Foreign Currency Exposure (FCE)  refers to the gross sum of all items on the balance sheet that have impact on  profit and loss account due to movement in foreign exchange rates. This may be  computed by following the provisions of relevant accounting standard. Items  maturing or having cash flows over the period of next five years only may be  considered.
UFCE may exclude items which are effective hedge of each other. For this  purpose, two types of hedges which may be considered are - financial hedge and  natural hedge. Financial hedge is ensured normally through a derivative  contract with a financial institution. Hedging through derivatives may only be  considered where the entity at inception of the derivative contract has  documented the purpose and the strategy for hedging and assessed its  effectiveness as a hedging instrument at periodic intervals. For the purpose of assessing the  effectiveness of hedge, guidance may be taken from the pronouncements of the  Institute of Chartered Accountants of India on the matter.
Natural hedge may be considered  when cash flows arising out of the operations of the company offset the risk  arising out of the FCE defined above. For the purpose of computing UFCE, an  exposure may be considered naturally hedged if the offsetting exposure has the  maturity/cash flow within the same accounting year. For instance, export  revenues (booked as receivable) may offset the exchange risk arising out of  repayment obligations of an external commercial borrowing if both the exposures  have cash flows/maturity within the same accounting year.
b. Estimate the extent of  likely loss:
The loss to the entity in case of movement in USD-INR exchange rate may be  calculated using the annualised volatilities. For this purpose, largest annual  volatility seen in the USD-INR rates  during the period of last ten years may be taken as the movement of the USD-INR  rate in the adverse direction
2
.
c. Estimate the riskiness of  unhedged position and provide appropriately:
Once the loss figure is  calculated, it may be compared with the annual EBID
3
as per the latest  quarterly results certified by the statutory auditors. This loss may be computed as a percentage of EBID. Higher  this percentage, higher will be the susceptibility of the entity to adverse  exchange rate movements. Therefore, as a prudential measure, all exposures to such  entities (whether in foreign currency or in INR) would attract incremental  capital and provisioning requirements (i.e., over and above the present  requirements) as under:
Likely Loss/EBID (%)
Incremental Provisioning Requirement on the total credit    exposures over and above extant standard asset provisioning
Incremental Capital Requirement
Upto15 per cent
0
0
More than 15 per cent and    upto 30 per cent
20bps
0
More than 30 per cent and    upto 50 per cent
40bps
0
More than 50 percent and upto    75 per cent
60bps
0
More than 75 per cent
4
80    bps
25    per cent increase in the risk weight
3. In terms of circular
DBOD.BP.BC.No.61/21.04.103/2012-13  dated November 21, 2012
, banks have to monitor the UFCE on a monthly interval.  Banks should calculate the incremental provisioning and capital requirements at  least on a quarterly basis. However, during periods of high USD-INR volatility,  the calculations may be done at monthly intervals.
4. The  implementation of these guidelines may pose some issues for exposures to  project under implementation and to new entities which may not have annual EBID figure  available.The calculation of incremental provisioning and capital requirements  for projects under implementation will be based on projected average EBID for  the three years from the date of commencement of commercial operations and  incremental capital and provisioning should be accordingly computed subject to  a minimum floor of 20 bps of provisioning requirement. For new entities also, the same framework may be  made applicable.
5. While  computing the UFCE of the foreign MNCs (i.e. MNCs incorporated outside India), intra-group foreign currency exposures  (e.g. a subsidiary of a foreign MNC in India may have borrowed from its  parent) may be excluded if the bank is satisfied that such foreign currency  exposures are appropriately hedged or managed robustly by the parent.
6. These  guidelines have been framed keeping in view the domestic borrowers’  vulnerability to the foreign currency exposure. However, currency induced  credit risk may also be considered for exposures of overseas branches and  foreign subsidiaries. For operationalizing these guidelines in case of  exposures of overseas branches and foreign subsidiaries of the bank, INR should  be replaced by the domestic currency of that jurisdiction.
7. Banks may ensure that their  policies and procedures for management of credit risk factor their exposure to  currency-induced credit risks and are calibrated towards borrowers whose  capacity to repay is sensitive to changes in the exchange rate and other market  variables. These could include stipulation of internal limits for these  exposures, which may be fixed while considering the overall risk appetite. Where such exposures are high, the options  available to the banks to reduce the associated  risks may  include reducing these exposures, encouraging borrowers to reduce their currency  mismatches by hedging foreign currency exposures, maintaining higher  provisioning and capital, etc. Banks should also ensure that the risk of  unhedged foreign currency exposure are effectively incorporated in their  internal credit rating system and ensure that their loan pricing policies adequately  reflect overall credit risks. Implementation of these requirements will be  dependent on a robust MIS for getting sufficient and credible data on a regular  basis from the borrowers.
8. Banks  may disclose their policies to manage currency induced credit risk as a part of  financial statements certified by statutory auditors. In addition, banks should  also disclose the incremental provisioning and capital held by them towards  this risk.
9. The quantification of currency induced  credit risk will form a part of banks’ Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment  Programme (ICAAP) and banks are expected to address this risk in a  comprehensive manner. The ICAAP should measure the extent of currency induced  credit risk the bank is exposed to and also concentration of such exposures.  Banks may also like to perform stress tests under various extreme but plausible  exchange rate scenarios under ICAAP. Outcome of ICAAP may lead a bank to take  appropriate risk management actions like risk reduction, maintenance of more  capital or provision, etc. As a part of Supervisory Review and Evaluation  Process (SREP) under Pillar 2, RBI may review the risk management measures  taken by the bank and its adequacy to manage currency induced credit risk,  especially if exposure to such risks is assessed to be on higher side.
10. This  framework may be implemented from April 1, 2014.
Yours  faithfully,
(Chandan Sinha)
Principal Chief General Manager
Annex
Extract from Second Quarter  Review of Monetary Policy Statement for 2013-14
Unhedged Foreign Currency  Exposure
22. Unhedged foreign currency exposures of corporates are a cause for  concern as they pose a risk to individual corporates as also to the entire  financial system. Based on feedback received from industry participants, it is  proposed to:
issue final  guidelines on unhedged foreign currency exposures by end-December 2013.
1
For the purpose  of this circular, ’entities’ means those entities which have borrowed from  banks including borrowing in INR and other currencies.
2
Banks may compute largest  annual volatility over a period of last ten years in the following manner:  First, daily changes in the USD-INR rates may be computed as a log return of  the today’s rate over the yesterday’s rate. Second, daily volatility may be  computed as standard deviation of these returns over a period of one year (250  observations). Third this daily volatility may be annualised by multiplying it  by square root of 250. This computation has to be performed on a daily basis  for the all the days in the last ten years. The largest annual volatility thus  computed should be used for the computation of the likely loss by multiplying  it with the UFCE.
3
EBID, as  defined for computation of DSCR = Profit After Tax + Depreciation + Interest on  debt + Lease Rentals, if any.
4
This category is most likely  to default on account of high unhedged exposures due to volatility in the  USD-INR rate. If the account becomes NPA, bank has to make provisions  accordingly.