(19 kb)
Conversion of External Commercial Borrowing and Lumpsum Fee/Royalty into Equity
RBI/2013-2014/449
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 94
January 16, 2014
To
All Category - I Authorised  Dealer banks
Madam/Sir,
Conversion of External  Commercial Borrowing and Lumpsum Fee/Royalty into Equity
Attention of Authorised Dealer (AD) banks is invited to
A.P. (DIR Series)  Circular No. 15 dated October 1, 2004
on the captioned subject.
2. In terms of the said circular, an  Indian company can issue equity shares against External Commercial Borrowings  (ECB) subject to conditions mentioned therein and pricing guidelines as  prescribed by the Reserve Bank from time to time regarding value of equity  shares to be issued. Reserve Bank has received some references regarding how  the rupee amount against which equity shares are to be issued shall be arrived  at; in other words, what rate of exchange shall be applied to the amount in foreign  currency borrowed or owed by the resident entity from/to the non-resident  entity.
3. It is clarified that where  the liability sought to be converted by the company is denominated in foreign  currency as in case of ECB, import of capital goods, etc. it will be in order  to apply the exchange rate prevailing on the date of the agreement between the  parties concerned for such conversion. Reserve Bank will have no objection if  the borrower company wishes to issue equity shares for a rupee amount less than  that arrived at as mentioned above by a mutual agreement with the ECB lender.  It may be noted that the fair value of the equity shares to be issued shall be  worked out with reference to the date of conversion only.
4. It is further clarified  that the principle of calculation of INR equivalent for a liability denominated  in foreign currency as mentioned at paragraph 3 above shall apply,
mutatis mutandis
, to all cases where any  payables/liability by an Indian company such as, lump sum fees/royalties, etc.  are permitted to be converted to equity shares or other securities to be issued  to a non-resident subject to the conditions stipulated under the respective  Regulations.
5. Authorised Dealers may bring the contents of this circular to the notice  of their constituents and customers concerned.
6. The directions contained in this circular have been issued under Section  10(4) and Section 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of  1999) and is without prejudice to permissions/approvals, if any, required under  any other law.
Yours  faithfully,
Rudra  Narayan Kar
Chief General Manager  In-Charge