(66 kb)
Import of Gold / Gold Dore by Nominated Banks /Agencies/Entities - Clarifications
RBI/2013-14/493
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.103
February 14, 2014
To
All Scheduled Commercial Banks which are Authorised Dealers  (ADs) in
Foreign Exchange/ All Agencies nominated for import of gold
Madam / Sir,
Import of Gold / Gold Dore by Nominated Banks /Agencies/Entities -  Clarifications
Attention of Authorised Persons is drawn to the Reserve Bank's
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 25 dated August 14, 2013
; and
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 73 dated November 11, 2013
on the captioned  subject.
2. Government of India and the Reserve Bank of India have been receiving  representations related to Advance Authorisation (AA) / Duty Free Import  Authorisation (DFIA). Taking into account these representations and in  consultation with the Government of India, it has been decided to issue the  following clarifications which come into force with immediate effect:
a) In  case of AA / DFIA issued before August 14, 2013, the condition of sequencing  imports prior to exports shall not be insisted upon even in case of entities /  units in the SEZ and EoUs, Premier and Star Trading Houses.
b) The  imports made as part of the AA/DFIA scheme will be outside the purview of the  20:80 scheme. Such Imports will be accounted for separately and will not  entitle the Nominated Agency/ Banks/Entities for any further import.
c) The  Nominated Banks / Agencies / Entities may make available gold to the exporters  (other than AA/DFIA holders) operating under the Replenishment Scheme. They can  resort to import of gold for the purpose, if considered necessary. However,  such import will be accounted for separately and will not entitle them for any  further import.
d) Import of gold in the third lot onwards will be  lesser of the two:
Five times the export for which proof has  been submitted; or
Quantity of gold permitted to a Nominated  Agency in the first or second lot.
A revised working example of the operations of 20:80 scheme envisaged  in terms of the revised instructions is given in the
Annex
.
3. Further with reference to
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 82 dated December 31, 2013
on import of Gold  Dore, it is clarified that:
i) The  refiners are allowed to import Gold Dore of 15% of their licence for
each of  the first two months.
ii) In  case, the quantity has already been identified by DGFT for first two lots,  import of such quantity will be in compliance with the guidelines issued vide
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 82 dated December 31, 2013.
iii) DGFT,  through a notification, may include new refiners, and fix licence quantity for  them.
4. Authorised  Dealers may bring the contents of this circular to the notice of their  constituents and customers concerned.
5. The directions contained  in this circular have been issued under Section 10(4) and Section 11(1) of the  Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA), 1999 (42 of
      1999), and are without  prejudice to permissions / approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours  faithfully,
(Rudra Narayan Kar)
Chief General Manager-in-Charge
Annex
Revised  working example of the operations of 20/80
scheme  for import of gold
*
1. A  Nominated Bank / Agency / any other entity ABC imports say 100 kg of gold,  which shall be routed through custom bonded warehouses only. If considered  necessary, the lot can be procured through two invoices – one for exporters  (i.e. 20%) and the other one for domestic users (80%).
2. Out  of the above import of 100 kg, 20 kg. gold held in the bonded warehouse can be  got released, in part or full, to be made available to the exporters of gold  against an undertaking to Customs Authorities as is the practice now.
3. The  balance 80 kg can be supplied in part or full to domestic entities engaged in  jewellery business / bullion traders / banks operating the Gold Deposit Scheme  against full upfront payment. In other words, no credit sale of gold in any  form will be permitted for domestic use. In case, the Nominated Bank itself is  operating the Gold Deposit Scheme, the bank is permitted to use out of 80 kg, a  portion for regularising own open position in gold arising out of operations of  the Gold Deposit Scheme.
4. Next  lot of import of 100 kg of gold by ABC shall be permitted by the Customs Authorities  only after the proof of export (i.e. 20% of the imported lot) is submitted.
5. Import  of gold in the third lot onwards will be lesser of the two:
i)
Five times the export for  which proof has been submitted;
or
ii)
Quantity of gold  permitted to a Nominated Agency in the first or second lot.
Note:  The same procedure is to be followed by the  refineries and by any other entity importing gold in any other form/purity and  in the case of import of Gold Dore also.
*  First  lot of gold import will be counted with effect from 14.08.2013.