(50 kb)
Foreign investment in India by SEBI registered FII, QFI and  long term investors in Corporate Debt
RBI/2013-14/494
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.104
February 14, 2014
To
All Category – I Authorised  Dealer Banks
Madam / Sir,
Foreign investment in India by SEBI  registered FII, QFI and long term  investors in Corporate Debt
Attention  of Authorized Dealer Category-I (AD Category-I) banks is invited to Schedule 5  to the Foreign Exchange Management (Transfer or Issue of Security by a Person  Resident outside India) Regulations, 2000 notified vide
Notification No. FEMA.20/2000-RB  dated May 3, 2000
, as  amended from time to time, in terms of which SEBI registered Foreign  Institutional Investors (FIIs), SEBI registered Qualified Foreign Investors  (QFIs) and long term investors registered with SEBI may purchase, on  repatriation basis Government securities and non-convertible debentures (NCDs)  / bonds issued by an Indian company subject to such terms and conditions as  mentioned therein and limits as prescribed for the same by RBI and SEBI from  time to time.
2.   Attention of AD Category-I banks is  also invited to
A.P.(DIR Series) Circular No.94 dated  April 1, 2013
, in terms of which the present limit for  investment by SEBI registered FIIs, QFIs and long term investors in Corporate  debt stands at USD 51 billion. Out of the above limit of USD 51 billion, a sub-limit  of USD 3.5 billion is available for investment by eligible investors in  Commercial Paper (CP). This sub-limit is being presently utilised only to the  extent of around 58% of the limit put in place by SEBI.
3.  On a review, to encourage long term  investors, it has now been decided, to reduce, with immediate effect, the  existing Commercial Paper sub-limit of USD 3.5 billion by USD 1.5 billion to  USD 2 billion. The balance USD 1.5 billion shall, however, continue to be part  of the total Corporate debt limit of USD 51 billion and will be available to  eligible foreign investors for investment in Corporate debt.
The revised  position is given below:
Instruments
Limit
Eligible Investors
Remarks
Corporate Debt including Commercial    Papers
USD 51 Billion
FIIs, QFIs and Long terms investors    registered with SEBI – Sovereign Wealth Funds (SWFs), Multilateral Agencies,    Pension/ Insurance/ Endowment Funds, Foreign Central Banks.
Eligible Investors may invest in    Commercial Papers only upto USD 2 billion within the limit of USD 51 billion.
4.  The operational guidelines in this regard  will be issued by SEBI.
5. All  other existing conditions for investment in Corporate debt remain unchanged.
6.  AD  Category – I banks may bring the contents of this circular to the notice of  their constituents and customers concerned.
7.  The  directions contained in this circular have been issued under sections 10(4) and  11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and are without  prejudice to permissions / approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours  faithfully,
(Rudra Narayan Kar)
Chief General Manager-in-Charge