(109 kb)
Know Your Customer (KYC) Norms /Anti-Money Laundering (AML) Standards/ Combating Financing of Terrorism (CFT)/Obligation of banks under Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002 – Recognising e-Aadhaar as an ‘Officially Valid Document’ under PML Rules – Primary (Urban) Cooperative Banks (UCBs)
RBI/2013-14/514
UBD.BPD  (PCB) Cir.No.50/14.01.062/2013-14
March 6, 2014
The Chief Executive Officer
All Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks.
Madam / Dear Sir,
Know Your  Customer (KYC) Norms /Anti-Money Laundering (AML) Standards/ Combating  Financing of Terrorism (CFT)/Obligation of banks under Prevention of Money  Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002 – Recognising e-Aadhaar as an ‘Officially Valid  Document’ under PML Rules – Primary (Urban) Cooperative Banks (UCBs)
Please  refer to
paragraph  2.6 (B)
of our Master Circular UBD.BPD. (PCB).MC.No.16 /12.05.001/2013-14  dated July 1, 2013 on Know Your Customer (KYC) Norms / Anti-Money Laundering  (AML) Measures / Combating of  Financing of Terrorism (CFT)/ Obligations of banks under PMLA, 2002 which  states that letter issued by the Unique Identification Authority of India  (UIDAI) containing details of name, address and Aadhaar number may be accepted  as an ‘Officially Valid Document’. Further,  in terms of paragraph 2.5 (ix) of the Master Circular, banks have been advised  that while opening accounts based on Aadhaar, if the address provided by the  account holder is the same as that on Aadhaar letter, it may be accepted as a  proof of both identity and address.
2. In  this connection, a reference may be made to our
circular  UBD.BPD (PCB) Cir. No.15 /14.01.062/2013-14 dated September 17, 2013
wherein, a decision to accept  e-KYC service as a valid process for KYC verification under Prevention of Money  Laundering (Maintenance of Records) Rules, 2005 was advised. It was further  advised that the information containing demographic details and photographs  made available from UIDAI as a result of e-KYC process (“which is in an  electronic form and accessible so as to be usable for a subsequent reference”)  may be treated as an ‘Officially Valid Document’ under PML Rules.
3. In  this regard, it is clarified that, UCBs may accept e-Aadhaar downloaded from  UIDAI website as an officially valid document subject to the following:
a) If the prospective customer knows  only his/her Aadhaar number, the UCB may print the prospective customer’s  e-Aadhaar letter in the UCB directly from the UIDAI portal; or adopt e-KYC  procedure as mentioned in the circular referred to in paragraph 2 above.
b) If the prospective customer carries  a copy of the e-Aadhaar downloaded elsewhere, the UCB may print the prospective  customer’s e-Aadhaar letter in the UCB directly from the UIDAI portal; or adopt  e-KYC procedure as mentioned in the circular referred in paragraph 2 above; or  confirm identity and address of the resident through simple authentication  service of UIDAI.
4.  Physical Aadhaar card/letter issued by UIDAI containing details of name,  address and Aadhaar number received through post and e-KYC process mentioned in  the circular referred to in paragraph 2 above would continue to be accepted as  an ‘Officially Valid Document’.
5. UCBs  may revise their KYC policy in the light of the above instructions and ensure  strict adherence to the same.
Yours faithfully,
(P.K.  Arora)
General  Manager