(96 kb)
Foreign Portfolio Investor - investment under Portfolio Investment Scheme, Government and Corporate debt
RBI/2013-14/533
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.112
March 25, 2014
To
All Category – I Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam / Sir,
Foreign  Portfolio Investor - investment under Portfolio Investment Scheme, Government  and Corporate debt
Attention of Authorised Dealer  Category – I (AD Category-I) banks is invited to the Foreign Exchange  Management (Transfer or Issue of Security by a Person Resident outside India)  Regulations, 2000 (the Principal Regulations) notified by the Reserve Bank vide
Notification No. FEMA. 20/2000-RB dated 3rd May 2000
, as  amended from time to time.
2. The extant guidelines for  Portfolio Investment Scheme for Foreign Institutional Investor (FII) and  Qualified Foreign Investor (QFI) have since been reviewed and it has been  decided to put in place a framework for investments under a new scheme called  ‘Foreign Portfolio Investment’ scheme.
3. The salient features of the new scheme are:
The  portfolio investor registered in accordance with SEBI guidelines shall be  called ‘Registered Foreign Portfolio Investor (RFPI)’. The existing portfolio  investor class, namely, Foreign Institutional Investor (FII) and Qualified  Foreign Investor (QFI) registered with SEBI shall be subsumed under RFPI;
RFPI may purchase and sell shares and convertible  debentures of Indian company through registered broker on recognised stock  exchanges in India as well as purchases shares and convertible debentures which  are offered to public in terms of relevant SEBI guidelines/ regulations.
RFPI may sell shares or  convertible debentures so acquired
in  open offer  in accordance with the SEBI  (Substantial Acquisition of Shares and Takeovers) Regulations, 2011; or
in an  open offer in accordance with the SEBI   (Delisting of Equity shares) Regulations, 2009; or
through  buyback of shares by a listed Indian company in accordance with the SEBI  (Buy-back of securities) Regulations, 1998
RFPI may also acquire shares or convertible debentures
in any  bid for, or acquisition of, securities in response to an offer for  disinvestment of shares made by the Central Government or any State Government;  or
in  any transaction in securities pursuant to an agreement entered into with  merchant banker in the process of market making or subscribing to unsubscribed  portion of the issue in accordance with Chapter XB of the Securities and  Exchange Board of India (Issue of Capital and Disclosure Requirements)  Regulations, 2009.
The individual and aggregate  investment limits for the RFPIs shall be below 10% (per cent) or 24% (per cent)  respectively of the total paid-up equity capital or 10% (per cent) or 24% (per  cent) respectively of the paid-up value of each series of  convertible debentures issued by an   Indian company. Further, where there is composite sectoral cap under FDI  policy, these limits for RFPI investment shall also be within such overall FDI  sectoral caps;
RFPI shall be eligible to open  a Special Non-Resident Rupee (SNRR) account and a foreign currency account with  Authorised Dealer bank and to transfer sums from foreign currency account to SNRR  account at the prevailing market rate for making genuine investments in  securities. The Authorised Dealer bank may transfer repatriable proceeds (after  payment of applicable taxes) from SNRR account to foreign currency account ;
RFPI shall be eligible to invest in government  securities and corporate debt subject to limits specified by the RBI and  SEBI  from time to time;
The investment by RFPI will be made subject to  the SEBI (FPI) Regulations 2014, modified by SEBI/Government of India from time  to time;
RFPI shall be permitted to trade in all exchange  traded derivative contracts on the stock exchanges in India subject to the  position limits as specified by SEBI from time to time;
RFPI may offer cash or foreign sovereign  securities with AAA rating or corporate bonds or domestic Government  Securities, as collateral to the recognized Stock Exchanges for their  transactions in the cash as well as derivative segment of the market.
4.  Any foreign institutional investor who holds  a valid certificate of registration from SEBI shall be deemed to be a  registered foreign portfolio investor (RFPI) till the expiry of the block of  three years for which fees have been paid as per the Securities and Exchange  Board of India (Foreign Institutional Investors) Regulations, 1995. A QFI may continue to  buy, sell or otherwise deal in securities subject to the SEBI (FPI)  Regulations, 2014 for a period of one year from the date of commencement of  these regulations, or until he obtains a certificate of registration as foreign  portfolio investor, whichever is earlier.
However, all investments made by  that FII/QFI in accordance with the regulations prior to registration as RFPI  shall continue to be valid and taken into account for computation of aggregate  limit.
5.  RFPI shall report the transaction to RBI as  being reported by FII in LEC Form as per extant practice.
6.  AD Category - I banks may bring the contents  of the circular to the notice of their customers/constituents concerned.
7. Reserve Bank has since  amended the Principal Regulations through the Foreign Exchange Management  (Transfer or Issue of Security by a Person Resident outside India) (Second  Amendment) Regulations, 2014 notified vide
Notification No.  FEMA.297/2014-RB dated March 13, 2014
, c.f.  G.S.R. No. 189(E) dated March 19, 2014.
8. The directions contained in this circular have  been issued under sections 10(4) and 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management  Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and are without prejudice to permissions / approvals, if  any, required under any other law.
Yours faithfully
(Rudra Narayan Kar)
Chief General Manager-In-Charge