(54 kb)
Financial Benchmarks- Governance Framework for Benchmark Submitters
RBI/2013-2014/565
FMD.MSRG.No.102/02.18.002/2013-14
April 16, 2014
All Scheduled Commercial  Banks and Primary Dealers
Dear Sir/ Madam,
Financial  Benchmarks- Governance Framework for Benchmark Submitters
As you are aware, the
Committee  on Financial Benchmarks
(Chairman: Shri P. Vijaya Bhaskar, Executive  Director) had submitted its Report on February 7, 2014 recommending several  measures/principles to be adopted in respect of major Indian Rupee interest  rate and Foreign exchange benchmarks to strengthen their quality, setting  methodology and the governance framework. The Reserve Bank has accepted the  recommendations of the Committee and as per the announcements made  in the
First  Bi-monthly Monetary Policy Statement 2014-15 on April 1, 2014
, the Bank has  set in motion the process to implement the recommendations of the Committee in  consultation with the Fixed Income Money Market and Derivatives Association of  India (FIMMDA) and Foreign Exchange  Dealers’ Association of India (FEDAI).
2. The Bank has since  advised the FIMMDA and FEDAI to act as the Administrator of the Indian Rupee  interest rate and Foreign exchange benchmarks respectively and to take  necessary steps to implement the recommendations of the Committee. In order to  overcome the possible conflicts of interest in the benchmark setting process  arising out of the current governance structure of the FIMMDA and FEDAI, an  independent body, either separately or jointly, may be formed by the FIMMDA and  FEDAI for administration of the benchmarks. In case of benchmarks determined  based on polled submissions, the FIMMDA and FEDAI may select the Benchmark  Submitters on the basis of their standing, market-share in the  benchmark/instrument linked to the benchmark and representative character and  may put in place a Code of Conduct specifying various provisions including  hierarchy of data inputs for submissions as  recommended by the Committee. The  Benchmark Submitters thus selected by the respective Administrator, have to  necessarily participate in the polling process and comply with the various  provisions specified in the Code of Conduct. The Benchmark Submitters may  extend necessary support and cooperation to the respective Benchmark  Administrator in strengthening the benchmark determination process.
3. In order to strengthen  the governance framework for benchmark submission, the Benchmark Submitters are  advised to implement the following measures:
The  Benchmark Submitters may put in place an internal Board approved policy on  governance of the benchmark submission process. The policy may ensure that  clearly accountable personnel at appropriate senior positions with requisite knowledge  and expertise are responsible for benchmark submissions.
They may  put in place an effective conflicts of interest policy which facilitates  identification of potential and actual conflicts of interest with respect to  benchmark submissions and lays down procedures to be followed for management,  mitigation or avoidance of such conflicts.
They may  establish a maker-checker system to ensure integrity of the submissions. The  submissions may be periodically reviewed by appropriate senior level officials in terms of minimum variance threshold
1
with respect to the published benchmark levels.
They may  establish appropriate internal controls to secure compliance with the benchmark  submission procedures. The transactions  which are taken as the basis for submission may be recorded so as to verify  that they represent bonafide arm’s length commercial transactions, and are not  undertaken solely for the purpose of benchmark submission. The personnel involved in benchmark  submissions may document the verifiable basis for their qualitative assessment  in absence of actual transaction data.
They may  establish an effective whistleblowing policy to facilitate early detection of  any potential misconduct or irregularities in the benchmark data submissions.
They may  retain all records relating to benchmark submissions including those containing  procedures and methodologies governing the submissions; names and roles of  personnel responsible for submissions and oversight of submissions;  declaration of conflicts of interest by the  related personnel; relevant communications between submitting parties;  interactions with Benchmark Administrator; exposure of individual traders as  well as the aggregate exposures of the Benchmark Submitters to the instruments  referenced to the benchmark; findings of internal and external audits and  remedial actions taken thereof for a minimum period of eight years.
They may  subject the benchmark submissions to periodic internal audit, and where  appropriate, to external audit.
They may  undertake submissions by way of written communications or through robust  contribution devices which leave an audit trail to eliminate possibilities of  errors.
They may conduct a reality self-check of their existing governance framework vis-à-vis  the above guidelines and report the status to the respective Benchmark Administrator by May 31, 2014.
They may periodically (periodicity to be  specified by the respective Benchmark Administrator) submit a confirmation to  the Benchmark Administrator for having complied with the regulatory guidelines  as well as the provisions of the Code of Conduct to be issued by the respective  Benchmark Administrator.
Yours sincerely
(G. Mahalingam)
Principal Chief General Manager
1
threshold variance of the submission with respect  to the final benchmark level, as stipulated in the internal policy of the Benchmark  Submitters