(164 kb)
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in Limited Liability Partnership (LLP)
RBI/2013-14/566
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 123
April 16, 2014
To,
All Category – I Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam  / Sir,
Foreign Direct  Investment (FDI) in Limited Liability Partnership (LLP)
Attention of  Authorised Dealer Category - I (AD Category - I) banks is invited to Schedule I  to the Foreign Exchange Management (Transfer or Issue of Security by a Person  Resident Outside India) Regulations, 2000 (The Principal Regulations), notified  vide
Notification No. FEMA 20/2000-RB dated May 3, 2000
, as amended from time  to time. In terms of extant instructions, only a Company incorporated under the  Companies Act, 1956 or a Venture Capital Fund is eligible to accept FDI.
2.  It has now been decided that Limited  Liability Partnership (LLP) formed and registered under the Limited Liability  Partnership Act, 2008 shall be eligible to acceptForeign Direct Investment (FDI) subject to the  conditions given in
Annex I
.
3.  A copy of
Press Note No. 1 (2011 series)
dated May 20, 2011 issued in this regard by  Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion (DIPP), Ministry of Commerce  & Industry, Government of India is enclosed. A reference is also drawn to  paragraph 3.2.5 of the Consolidated FDI Policy Circular 1of 2013 dated April 5,  2013 issued by DIPP, in the matter.
4.  Reserve Bank has since amended the Principal Regulations through the  Foreign Exchange Management (Transfer or Issue of Security by a Person Resident  outside India) (Third Amendment) Regulations, 2014 notified vide
Notification No. FEMA. 298 /2014-RB dated March  13, 2014
c.f. G.S.R. No.190(E) dated March 19, 2014.
5. The  instructions issued in this circular shall be effective from May 20, 2011.  However, reporting requirement of FDI in LLP shall come into force from the  date of issue of instructions by the Reserve Bank in this regard. The LLP which  have received foreign investment in terms of FIPB approval between May 20, 2011  to the date of this circular, shall comply with the reporting requirement in  respect of FDI within 30 or 60 days, as applicable, from the date of this  circular.
6.  AD  Category – I banks may bring the contents of this circular to the notice of  their constituents and customers concerned.
7.   The directions in this circular  have been issued under Sections 10(4) and 11(1) of Foreign Exchange Management  Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and are without prejudice to permissions / approvals, if  any, required under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(Rudra Narayan Kar)
Chief General Manager-in-Charge
Annex I
[Annex to A. P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 123 dated April 16, 2014]
Scheme for Acquisition/  Transfer by a person resident outside India of capital contribution or
profit share of Limited Liability Partnerships (LLPs)
The Scheme shall be  called Foreign Direct Investment (FDI-LLP) in Limited Liability Partnerships  (LLPs) formed and registered under the Limited  Liability Partnership Act, 2008.
1. Eligible Investors:
A person resident outside India or an entity incorporated outside India shall be  eligible investor for the purpose of FDI in LLPs. However, the following  persons shall not be eligible to invest in LLPs:
(i) a citizen/entity of Pakistan and Bangladesh or
(ii) a SEBI registered  Foreign Institutional Investor (FII) or
(iii) a SEBI registered  Foreign Venture Capital Investor (FVCI) or
(iv) a SEBI registered Qualified Foreign Investor (QFI)  or
(v) a Foreign Portfolio  Investor registered in accordance with Securities and Exchange Board of India(Foreign  Portfolio Investors) Regulations, 2014 (RFPI).
2. Eligibility of LLP for accepting  foreign Investment:
(i) An LLP, existing or new, operating in  sectors/activities where 100% FDI is allowed under the automatic route of FDI  Scheme would be eligible to receive FDI. For ascertaining such sectors,  reference shall be made to Annex-B to Schedule 1 of Notification No. FEMA 20/ 2000-RB dated 3rd  May 2000, as amended from time to time.
(ii) An LLP engaged in the following  sectors/activities shall not be eligible to accept FDI:
a) Sectors eligible to accept 100% FDI under  automatic route but are subject to FDI-linked performance related conditions  (for example minimum capitalisation norms applicable to 'Non-Banking Finance  Companies' or 'Development of Townships, Housing, Built-up infrastructure and  Construction-development projects', etc.); or
b) Sectors eligible to accept less than 100% FDI  under automatic route; or
c) Sectors eligible to accept FDI under Government  Approval route; or
d) Agricultural/plantation activity and print  media; or
e) Sectors not eligible to accept FDI i.e. any  sector which is prohibited under the extant FDI policy (Annex-A to Schedule 1 to Notification No. FEMA.  20/ 2000-RB dated  3rd May 2000) as well as sectors/activities prohibited in terms of  Regulation 4(b) to
Notification No. FEMA.1/ 2000-RB dated 3rd  May 2000
, as amended from time to time.
3. Eligible investment:
Contribution to the capital of a LLP would be  an eligible investment under the Scheme.
Note: Investment by way of ‘profit share’ will  fall under the category of reinvestment of earnings
4. Entry    Route:
Any FDI in a LLP shall require prior  Government/FIPB approval.
Any form of foreign investment in an LLP, direct  or indirect (regardless of nature of ‘ownership’ or ‘control’ of an Indian  Company) shall require Government/FIPB approval.
5.   Pricing:
FDI  in an LLP either by way of capital contribution or by way of acquisition /  transfer of ‘profit shares’, would have to be more than or equal to the fair  price as worked out with any valuation norm which is internationally accepted/  adopted as per market practice (hereinafter referred to as “fair price of capital  contribution/profit share of an LLP”) and a valuation certificate to that  effect shall be issued by a Chartered Accountant or by a practicing Cost Accountant  or by an approved valuer from the panel  maintained by the Central Government.
In case of transfer of capital  contribution/profit share from a resident to a non-resident, the transfer shall  be for a consideration equal to or more than the fair price of capital  contribution/profit share of an LLP. Further, in case of transfer of capital  contribution/profit share from a non-resident to a resident, the transfer shall  be for a consideration which is less than or equal to the fair price of the  capital contribution/profit share of an LLP.
6.  Mode of payment for an eligible investor:
Payment by an eligible investor towards  capital contribution/profit share of LLPs will be allowed only by way of cash  consideration to be received -
i) by  way of inward remittance through normal banking channels; or
ii)  by debit to NRE/FCNR(B) account of the person concerned, maintained with  an AD Category - I bank.
7. Reporting:
(i)  LLPs shall report to the Regional Office concerned of the Reserve Bank, the  details of the receipt of the amount of consideration for capital contribution  and profit shares in Form FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT-LLP(I) as given in
Annex II
, together with a copy/ies of the FIRC/s evidencing the  receipt of the remittance along with the KYC report on the non-resident  investor in
Annex I
V
, through an AD Category – I bank, and  valuation certificate (as per paragraph 5 above) as regards pricing at the  earliest but not later than 30 days from the date of receipt of the amount of  consideration. The report would be acknowledged by the Regional Office  concerned, which would allot a Unique Identification Number (UIN) for the  amount reported.
(ii)  The AD Category – I bank in India,  receiving the remittance should obtain a KYC report in respect of the foreign  investor from the overseas bank remitting the amount.
(iii)  Disinvestment / transfer of capital contribution or profit share between a  resident and a non-resident (or vice versa) shall require to be reported within 60  days from the date of receipt of funds in Form  FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT-LLP(II) as given in
Annex III
.
8. Downstream investment:
a) An Indian  company, having foreign investment (direct or indirect, irrespective of  percentage of such foreign investment), will be permitted to make downstream  investment in an LLP only if both, the company as well as the LLP, are operating in sectors where 100% FDI is  allowed under the automatic route and there are no FDI-linked performance  related conditions. Onus shall be on the LLP accepting investment from the Indian  Company registered under the provisions of the Companies Act, as applicable, to  ensure compliance with downstream investment requirement as stated above.
b) An LLP with FDI under this scheme will not be  eligible to make any downstream investments in any entity in India.
9.  Other  Conditions:
(i) In  case, an LLP with FDI, has a body corporate as a designated partner or  nominates an individual to act as a designated partner in accordance with the  provisions of Section 7 of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008, such a  body corporate should only be a company registered in India under the  provisions of the Companies Act, as applicable and not any other body, such as  an LLP or a Trust. For such LLPs, the designated partner "resident in  India", as defined under the 'Explanation' to Section 7(1) of the Limited  Liability Partnership Act, 2008, would also have to satisfy the definition of  "person resident in India", as prescribed under Section 2(v)(i) of  the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999.
(ii)  The designated partners will be responsible for compliance with all the above  conditions and also liable for all penalties imposed on the LLP for their  contravention, if any.
(iii) Conversion  of a company with FDI, into an LLP, will be allowed only if the above  stipulations (except the stipulation as regards mode of payment) are met and  with the prior approval of FIPB/Government.
(iv) LLPs shall not be permitted to avail External  Commercial Borrowings (ECBs).