(135 kb)
Fund/Non-Fund based Credit Facilities to Overseas Joint Ventures / Wholly Owned Subsidiaries / Wholly owned Step-down Subsidiaries of Indian Companies
RBI/2013-14/568
DBOD.No.BP.BC.107/21.04.048/2013-14
April 22, 2014
The  Chairman and Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer
All  Scheduled Commercial Banks
(Excluding  Local Area Banks and Regional Rural Banks)
Dear Sir,
Fund/Non-Fund based Credit Facilities to
Overseas Joint Ventures / Wholly Owned Subsidiaries /
Wholly owned Step-down Subsidiaries of Indian Companies
Please refer to our circular
DBOD.IBD.BC.No.96/23.37.001/2006-07  dated May 10, 2007
, in terms of which banks were permitted to extend  fund/non-fund based credit facilities to overseas Joint Ventures (JV)/Wholly Owned Subsidiaries (WOS)/Wholly  owned Step-down Subsidiaries (WoSDS) of subsidiaries of Indian companies upto 20 per cent of their unimpaired capital funds  (Tier I and Tier II capital) subject to certain conditions. The resource  base for such lending should be funds held in foreign currency accounts, such  as FCNR(B), EEFC, RFC etc., in respect of which banks have to manage the  exchange risk.
2. Further, as per paragraph  5(b) of Notification No.FEMA 8/2000-RB dated May 3, 2000, Authorised Dealer Banks were permitted to extend guarantees  to or on behalf of overseas JV/WOS of an Indian company
in connection with  its business
. In terms of
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No.29 dated March 27, 2006
, guarantees issued by  banks in India  in favour of overseas JV/WOS of Indian companies would be subject to prudential  norms issued by the Reserve Bank from time to time.
3. The above measures were  intended to assist Indian companies in their overseas business. However, it has  been observed that banks are extending non-fund based credit facilities like guarantees/stand-by  letter of credits/letter of comforts etc. on behalf of JV/WOS/WoSDS for  purposes which are not connected with their business, rather, in certain cases,  used to avail foreign currency loans for repayment of Rupee loans.
4. Accordingly, it is advised that, banks, including  overseas branches/subsidiaries of Indian banks, shall not issue standby letters  of credit/guarantees/letter of comforts etc. on behalf of overseas JV/WOS/WoSDS  of Indian companies for the purpose of raising loans/advances of any kind from  other entities except in connection with the ordinary course of overseas  business. We further advise that while extending fund/non-fund based credit  facilities to overseas JV/WOS/WoSDS of Indian  companies in connection with their business, either through branches in India or through  branches/subsidiaries abroad, banks should ensure  effective monitoring of the end use of such facilities and its conformity with the business needs of such entities.
5. In terms of circular
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No.134 dated June 25, 2012
, Indian companies in the  manufacturing and infrastructure sector were allowed to avail of external commercial  borrowings (ECBs) for repayment of Rupee loans availed of from domestic banking  system and / or for fresh Rupee capital  expenditure, under the approval route, subject to satisfying certain conditions.  However, if the ECB is availed from overseas branches/subsidiaries  of Indian banks, the risk remains within the Indian banking system. It has,  therefore, been decided that repayment of Rupee loans availed of from domestic  banking system through ECBs extended by overseas branches/subsidiaries of  Indian banks will, henceforth, not be permitted.
6. As per instructions contained in paragraph 4(1)(i) of
Notification  No.FEMA 8/2000-RB dated May 3, 2000
, Authorised Dealer Banks have been allowed  to issue guarantees in respect of a debt, obligation or other liability  incurred by an exporter, on account of exports from India. It was intended  to
facilitate execution of export contracts
by the exporter and not for  other purposes. It has, however, come to our notice that some exporter  borrowers are using export advances, received on the strength of guarantees  issued by Indian banks, for repayment of loans availed of from Indian banks.  This is a clear violation of our instructions except in cases where banks have  received approvals under FEMA and banks are advised to desist from such  practices.
Yours faithfully,
(Rajesh Verma)
Chief  General Manager