(179 kb)
Scaling up of the Business Correspondent (BC) Model – Issues in Cash Management
RBI/2013-14/570
RPCD.FID.BC.No. 96/12.01.011/ 20013-14
April 22, 2014
The Chairman/ Managing Director/
Chief Executive Officer
All  Scheduled Commercial Banks
Dear Sir/Madam,
Scaling up of the Business Correspondent (BC) Model –
Issues in Cash Management
Please refer to
Para 26 (Part B)
of Governor's  bi-monthly policy statement dated April 1, 2014 on the above subject.
2. In this connection, we advise that,  after opening of large number of banking outlets in the last three years in  hitherto unbanked areas of the country through the BC-ICT model, the time has  come to monitor the usage in terms of transactions per BC so as to ensure  sustainability of the BC model. One of the critical issues identified in this  regard has been of Cash Management of BCs.
3. The insistence by banks on BCs to fully  prefund their accounts even after considerably long business relationship has  become a major impediment in scaling up operations of BCs. Similarly,  low/delayed payment of remuneration of BCs and passing on the responsibility of  insuring cash to BCs have also been proving to be irritants in increasing the  usage in large number of bank accounts opened. It is, therefore, important for  banks to recognize that cash handled by BCs, while doing banking business on  behalf of the Bank, is Bank's Cash. In view of the above and with a view to  scale up the BC model it has been decided that:-
The Boards of the  Banks must review the operations of BCs at least once every six months with a  view to ensuring that requirement of prefunding of Corporate BCs and BC Agents  should progressively taper down with the passage of time. Ideally in all normal  cases the prefunding should progressively come down in such a manner so as to  reach around 15% of the limits fixed for each BC/CSP in case of deposits and  30% in case of Bank Guarantees, etc. in say 2 years from the time a BC starts  operations.
The Board should also review the position of payment of  remuneration of BCs and should also lay down a system of monitoring by the top  management of the Bank. The issue of allowing BCs to handle deposit and payment  transactions of various credits, remittance, overdraft and other products of  banks must also be examined by the Board from time to time. Complaints  redressal system in this regard should also be laid down by the Board.
As  the cash handled by BCs is Bank’s cash, the responsibility for insuring this  cash should rest with the banks.
Yours faithfully
(A Udgata)
Principal  Chief General Manager