(238 kb)
External Commercial Borrowings (ECB) Policy: Re-schedulement of ECB - Simplification of procedure
RBI/2013-14/584
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 128
May 9, 2014
To
All Category – I Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam/ Sir,
External Commercial Borrowings (ECB)  Policy:
Re-schedulement of ECB - Simplification of procedure
Attention of Authorised Dealer Category – I (AD  Category – I) banks is invited to the instructions contained in
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No.33 dated February 09, 2010
in terms of which AD  Category – banks are permitted to approve changes / modifications in the  drawdown / repayment schedule of the ECBs already availed, both under the  approval and the automatic routes, subject to the conditions. However, any  elongation / rollover in the repayment on expiry of the original maturity of  the ECB requires the prior approval of the Reserve Bank.
2. As a measure of simplification of the  existing procedures, it has been decided to delegate the power to the  designated AD Category – I bank to allow re-schedulement of ECB due to changes  in draw-down schedule and / or repayment schedule with the following  conditions:
Changes, if any, in all-in-cost  (AIC) is only on account of the change in average maturity period (AMP) due to  re-schedulement of ECB and post re-schedulement, the AIC and the AMP are in  conformity with applicable guidelines. There should not be any increase in the  rate of interest and no additional cost (in foreign currency / Indian Rupees)  should be involved.
The re-schedulement is allowed  only once, before the maturity of the ECB.
If the lender is an overseas  branch of a domestic bank, the prudential norms applicable on account of  re-schedulement should be complied with.
The changes on account of  re-schedulement should be reported to DSIM through revised Form 83.
The ECB should be in compliance  with all applicable guidelines related to eligible borrower, recognised lender,  AIC, AMP, end-uses, etc.
The borrower should not be in the default / caution  list of RBI and should not be under the investigation of Directorate of  Enforcement.
3. The facility will be available for
ECBs  raised both under the automatic and approval routes
. Provisions of this  Circular do not apply to FCCBs.
4. The modification to the ECB policy will come  into force with immediate effect. All other aspects of the ECB policy shall  remain unchanged.
5. AD Category - I banks may bring the contents  of this circular to the notice of their constituents and customers.
6. The directions contained in this circular  have been issued under sections 10(4) and 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange  Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and are without prejudice to permissions /  approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(Rudra  Narayan Kar)
Chief  General Manager-in-Charge