(47 kb)
Opening of Bank Accounts in the Names of Minors
RBI/2013-14/587
UBD.BPD.(PCB).Cir.No 61/13.01.000/2013-14
May 12, 2014
The Chief Executive Officer
All Primary (Urban)  Co-operative Banks
Dear Sir/Madam,
Opening of Bank Accounts in the Names of Minors
Please refer to our  circular UBD.(DC) 1148/V.1-84/85 dated February 22, 1985, in terms of which banks  were advised to allow minors’ accounts (fixed and savings deposit accounts)  with mothers as guardians to be opened, subject to safeguards in allowing  operations in such accounts by ensuring that the minors’ accounts opened with  guardian are not allowed to be overdrawn and that these always remain in  credit. Subsequently, Urban Co-operative  Banks (UCBs) were advised to extend the  facility of allowing opening of minors’ account with mothers as guardian, to  Recurring Deposits.
2. With a view to promoting  the objective of financial inclusion and also to bring uniformity among banks  in opening and operating minors’ accounts, banks are advised as under:
A savings /fixed / recurring bank deposit  account can be opened by a minor of any age through his/her natural or legally  appointed guardian.
Minors above the age of 10 years may be  allowed to open and operate savings bank accounts independently, if they so  desire. Banks may, however, keeping in view their risk management systems, fix  limits in terms of age and amount up to which minors may be allowed to operate  their deposit accounts independently. They can also decide, in their own  discretion, as to what minimum documents are required for opening of accounts  by minors.
On attaining majority, the erstwhile minor  should confirm the balance in his/her account and if the account is operated by  the natural guardian / legal guardian, fresh operating instructions and  specimen signature of erstwhile minor should be obtained and kept on record for  all operational purposes.
3. UCBs are free to offer  additional banking facilities like internet banking, ATM/ debit card, cheque  book facility etc., subject to the safeguards that minor accounts are not  allowed to be overdrawn and that these always remain in credit.
Yours  faithfully,
(A.K.Bera)
Principal Chief General  Manager