(127 kb)
RRBs - Need for Bank Branches/ATMs to be made accessible to persons with disabilities
RBI/2013-14/608
RPCD.CO.RRB.BC.No.103/03.05.33/2013-14
May 27, 2014
The Chairmen
Regional  Rural Banks
Dear Sir/Madam,
Need for Bank Branches / ATMs to be made
accessible to persons with disabilities
Please refer to our
circular RPCD.CO.RRB.BC.No.97/03.05.90-A/2008-09 dated  April 21, 2009
on the captioned subject, wherein Regional Rural Banks (RRBs)  were advised to provide, inter alia, ramps in all existing and future ATMs, and  make at least one third of new ATMs installed as talking ATMs with Braille  keypads.
2. We have been receiving several suggestions  from members of public through Government of India and otherwise, on  facilitating easy access to bank branches and ATMs by persons with disabilities  for undertaking day to day banking transactions. We have examined such  suggestions. As advised in the above circular, RRBs have to take necessary  steps
to provide all existing ATMs / future ATMs with  ramps
so that wheel chair users / persons with disabilities can  easily access them. Care may also be taken to make arrangements in such a way  that the height of the ATMs do not create an impediment in their use by  wheelchair users. However, in cases where it is impracticable to provide such  ramp facilities, whether permanently fixed to earth or otherwise, this  requirement may be dispensed with, for reasons recorded and displayed in  branches or ATMs concerned.
3. RRBs  are also to take appropriate steps, including providing of ramps at the  entrance of the bank branches, wherever feasible, so that the persons with  disabilities/wheel chair users can enter bank branches and conduct business  without difficulty. RRBs are advised to report the progress made in this regard  periodically to their respective Customer Service Committee of the Board and  ensure compliance.
4. Further, it has come to our notice that some  of the RRBs have not made at least one third of the new ATMs installed as  talking ATMs with Braille keypads as advised vide circular referred to above.  It is, therefore, reiterated that RRBs should make all new ATMs installed from  July 1, 2014 as talking ATMs with Braille keypads. RRBs should lay down a road  map for converting all existing ATMs as talking ATMs with Braille keypads and  the same may be reviewed from time to time by the Customer Service Committee of  the Board.
5. In addition to the above, magnifying glasses  should also be provided in all bank branches for the use of persons with low  vision, wherever they require for carrying out banking transactions with ease.  The branches should display a notice at a prominent place about the  availability of magnifying glasses and other facilities available for persons  with disabilities.
Yours faithfully,
(A.Udgata)
Principal  Chief General Manager