(124 kb)
RRBs - Opening of Bank Accounts in the Names of Minors
RBI/2013-14/610
RPCD.CO.RRB.BC.No.104/03.05.33/2013-14
May 27, 2014
The Chairmen,
All Regional Rural Banks
Dear Sir/Madam,
Opening of Bank Accounts in the Names of Minors
Please refer to para 4.10 of our
circular  RPCD.CO.RRB.BC.No.100/03.05.33/2013-14 dated May 12, 2014
wherein Regional  Rural Banks were advised to allow minors’ accounts (fixed, savings and  recurring deposit accounts only) with mothers as guardians to be opened subject  to safeguards in allowing operations in such accounts by ensuring that the  minors’ accounts opened with guardian are not allowed to be overdrawn and that  these always remain in credit.
2. With a view to promote the objective of  financial inclusion and also to bring uniformity among banks in opening and  operating minors’ accounts, Regional Rural Banks are advised as under:
A savings /fixed / recurring bank deposit account can be  opened by a minor of any age through his/her natural or legally appointed  guardian.
Minors above the age of 10 years may be allowed to open and  operate savings bank accounts independently, if they so desire. Banks may,  however, keeping in view their risk management systems, fix limits in terms of  age and amount up to which minors may be allowed to operate the deposit  accounts independently. They can also decide, in their own discretion, as to  what minimum documents are required for opening of accounts by minors.
On  attaining majority, the erstwhile minor should confirm the balance in his/her  account and if the account is operated by the natural guardian / legal  guardian, fresh operating instructions and specimen signature of erstwhile  minor should be obtained and kept on record for all operational purposes.
3. RRBs are free to offer additional banking  facilities like ATM/ debit card, cheque book facility, internet banking (as and  when permitted) etc., subject to the safeguards that minor accounts are not  allowed to be overdrawn and that these always remain in credit.
Yours faithfully,
(A. Udgata)
Principal  Chief General Manager