(34 kb)
Crystallization of Inoperative Foreign Currency Deposits
RBI/2013-14/616
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.136
May 28, 2014
To
All  Category - I Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam  / Sir,
Crystallization of Inoperative Foreign Currency Deposits
The Reserve Bank of India, in exercise of the  powers conferred by subsections (1) and (5) of Section 26(A) of the Banking  Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949) has formulated the Reserve Bank
(Depositor  Education and Awareness Fund) Scheme, 2014
. This Fund will be credited with the  credit balances of any account in India with a banking company which has not  been operated for a period of ten years or any deposit or any amount remaining  unclaimed for more than ten years within a period of three months from the  expiry of ten years.
2. With  the objective of aligning the instructions in respect of foreign currency  accounts with the above scheme, Reserve Bank of India has issued Foreign  Exchange Management (Crystallization of Inoperative Foreign Currency Deposits)  Regulations, 2014 vide
Notification No. FEMA 10A/2014-RB dated March 21, 2014
under Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA), 1999 relating to inoperative foreign  currency deposits.
3. Accordingly, Authorised Dealer banks shall  crystallise, that is, convert the credit balances in any inoperative foreign  currency denominated deposit into Indian Rupee, in the manner indicated below:
(i)  In case a foreign currency denominated deposit with a fixed maturity date  remains inoperative for a period of three years from the date of maturity of  the deposit, at the end of the third year, the authorised bank shall convert  the balances lying in the foreign currency denominated deposit into Indian  Rupee at the exchange rate prevailing as on that date. Thereafter, the  depositor shall be entitled to claim either the said Indian Rupee proceeds and  interest thereon, if any, or the foreign  currency equivalent (calculated at the rate prevalent as on the date of  payment) of the Indian Rupee proceeds of  the original deposit and interest, if any, on such Indian Rupee  proceeds.
(ii) In case of foreign currency  denominated deposit with no fixed maturity period, if the deposit remains inoperative  for a period of three years (debit of bank charges not to be reckoned as  operation), the authorised bank shall, after giving a three month notice to the  depositor at his last known address as available with it, convert the deposit  from the foreign currency in which it is denominated to Indian Rupee at the end  of the notice period at the prevailing exchange rate. Thereafter, the depositor  shall be entitled to claim either the said Indian Rupee proceeds and interest  thereon, if any, or the foreign currency  equivalent (calculated at the rate prevalent as on the date of payment) of the  Indian Rupee proceeds of the original  deposit and interest, if any, on such Indian Rupee proceeds.
4. AD Category- I banks may bring the contents  of the circular to the notice of their constituents concerned.
5. The directions contained in this circular  have been issued under Sections 10(4) and 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999  (42 of 1999) and is without prejudice to permissions / approvals, if any, required  under any other law.
Yours  faithfully
Rudra Narayan Kar
Chief General Manager-in-Charge