(104 kb)
Capital and Provisioning Requirements for Exposures to entities with Unhedged Foreign Currency Exposure-Clarifications
RBI/2013-14/620
DBOD.No.BP.BC.116/21.06.200/2013-14
June 3, 2014
The  Chairman and Managing Director/
Chief  Executive Officer
All  Scheduled Commercial Banks
(Excluding  RRBs and LABs)
Dear Sir,
Capital and Provisioning  Requirements for Exposures to entities with  Unhedged Foreign Currency Exposure-Clarifications
Please refer to our
circular  DBOD.No. BP.BC. 85/21.06.200/2013-14 dated January 15, 2014
detailing  guidelines on capital and provisioning requirements for exposures to entities  with Unhedged Foreign Currency Exposure (UFCE). In this connection, we have  received a number of queries from banks on certain provisions of the guidelines,  clarifications for which are given as under.
2. The implementation of guidelines is dependent on  getting quality data from entities on a periodic basis. The banks have  mentioned that the accuracy of the information on UFCE received from entities could  be ensured if entities submit information to banks which is audited by  statutory auditors. It is, therefore, advised that information on UFCE may be  obtained from entities on a quarterly basis on self-certification basis, and preferably  should be internally audited by the entity concerned. However, at least on an  annual basis, UFCE information should be audited and certified by the statutory  auditors of the entity for its authenticity. In case of exposures of overseas  branches/subsidiaries, to begin with, the requirement of statutory audit may  not be insisted upon.
3. The guidelines assess the riskiness of the unhedged  foreign currency exposure of the corporate from the perspective of the  volatility of USD-INR exchange rates. On requests from banks, it is clarified  that Foreign Currency Exposure (FCE) in currencies other than USD may be  converted into USD using the current market rates.
4. The guidelines have given a detailed step-by-step  procedure for calculating USD-INR annualised volatility. Banks feel that  annualised volatility computed by them may vary from bank to bank. Banks have  requested that in order to ensure that a consistent annualised volatility is  used across banking industry, RBI may mandate Foreign Exchange Dealers’  Association of India (FEDAI) to publish the USD-INR annual volatility which has  to be used for computation of likely loss. Accordingly, it is advised that RBI  will request FEDAI to compute the volatility of USD-INR rate based on the RBI  reference rate by following the provisions of the guidelines and the same may  be used for computing the extent of likely loss on account of UFCE. However,  till the time FEDAI starts placing this information on its website on a daily  basis, banks may continue to compute the volatility figure by following the  provisions of the guidelines.
5. UFCE guidelines require that the likely loss on  account of exchange rate movements should be compared with the annual EBID as  per the latest quarterly results certified by the statutory auditors. Banks  have mentioned that in case of private/unlisted companies, the audited EBID may  not be available on a quarterly basis. In this context, it is advised that in  case of unavailability of the audited results of the last quarter, latest  audited quarterly or yearly results available have to be used. The yearly EBID  figure used should at least be of the last financial year. It is also clarified  that the guidelines do not differentiate between limited audited results and  full audited results.
6. The guidelines introduce incremental capital and  provisioning requirements over and above present requirements. Banks have  requested clarification on the amount of exposure on which incremental capital  and provisioning amount has to be computed, as the exposure used for computing  capital and provisions are computed differently. In this context, it is advised  that incremental provisioning for UFCE should be based on the exposure amount  which is used for computing standard asset provisioning and incremental capital  requirements for UFCE should be based on the exposure amount which is used for  computing credit risk capital requirements.
7. The guidelines are applicable to all entities on which  the bank has taken credit exposure. Banks have requested clarification if the  guidelines are applicable to inter-bank exposures also. In this context, it is  clarified that inter-bank exposures may be excluded from the ambit of the UFCE  guidelines.
8. The guidelines are applicable to all entities  irrespective of the size of the entity. Banks have mentioned that computation  of incremental capital and provisioning requirements on a quarterly basis for  smaller entities will be operationally cumbersome. In this context, for  exposures to smaller entities which are having unhedged foreign currency  exposure, banks may have the option of following a standardised method which  would require an incremental provisioning of 10 bps over and above extant  standard asset provisioning. Banks following standardised method for smaller  entities will not be required to get UFCE data from these entities and therefore  will not be required to compute incremental capital and provisioning based on  likely loss as a percentage of EBID in respect of these smaller entities. It is further clarified that smaller entities  are those entities on which total exposure of the banking system is at
`
25  crore or less.
9. Standard asset provisions are presently eligible for  inclusion in the Tier 2 capital within certain limits. Banks have requested to  clarify if the incremental provisioning kept by following the guidelines will  also be eligible for including in the Tier 2 capital in line with the present  requirements. In this context, it is clarified that the incremental provision  required is in addition to the present standard asset provisioning requirement.  It may, therefore be treated as general provision for disclosures and inclusion  in Tier 2 capital, similar to the existing treatment applicable to general  provisions. Presently, for banks following standardised approach for credit  risk, general provisions are admitted as Tier 2 capital up to a maximum of  1.25% of credit risk weighted assets. Under Internal Ratings Based Approach,  where the total expected loss amount is less than total eligible provisions,  banks may recognise the difference as Tier 2 capital up to maximum of 0.6% of  credit-risk weighted assets calculated under IRB approach.
10. The computation of incremental capital and  provisioning is dependent on the extensive data collected from entities. Banks  have mentioned that it may not be possible to get the required data in a timely  manner in respect of all entities on which a bank has the credit exposure.  Banks have requested clarification on the course of action to be followed in  respect of exposure to entities which are not able to provide required data. In  this context, it is advised that in cases, where the bank is not able to get  sufficient data to compute UFCE, the bank may take a conservative view and  place the exposure at the last bucket which requires incremental provisioning  of 80bps and a 25 per cent increase in risk weight. It would be appropriate for  a bank to price the cost of compliance with the UFCE guidelines on its lending  rate for the borrower as it would improve quality and timeliness of  information/data.
11. UFCE guidelines have become effective from April 1,  2014. Some banks have mentioned that as the required provision will be computed  for the first time for the April-June quarter, the entire provisioning burden  will fall on the earnings of one quarter. In this context, it is advised that the  additional provisioning requirement applicable for April-June 2014 quarter  based on the UFCE guidelines may be distributed equally during the financial  year 2014-15. However, such relaxation would not be there for capital  requirements.
Yours faithfully,
(Rajesh Verma)
Chief General Manager-in-Charge