(86 kb)
Pledge of shares for business purposes in favour of NBFCs
RBI/2013-14/633
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.141
June 6, 2014
To
All Category – I Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam/ Sir,
Pledge  of shares for business purposes in favour of NBFCs
Attention  of Authorised Dealer Category – I (AD Category – I) banks is invited to the  provisions of Para. 2 (i) of
A. P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 57 dated May 2,  2011
, in terms of which shares of an Indian company held by the non-resident  investor can be pledged in favour of a bank in India to secure the credit  facilities being extended to the resident investee company for bonafide  business purposes subject to the conditions stipulated therein.
2.  With a view to further rationalising the process and reducing the transaction  time, it has been decided to delegate to the AD Category – I banks the powers  to allow pledge of equity shares of an Indian company held by non-resident  investor/s in accordance with the FDI policy, in favour of the Non - Banking  Financial Companies (NBFCs) – whether listed or not, to secure the credit  facilities extended to the resident investee company for bona-fide business  purposes / operations, subject to compliance with the conditions indicated  below:
only the equity shares listed on a recognised stock exchange/s in  India can be pledged in favour of the NBFCs ;
in case of invocation of  pledge, transfer of shares should be in accordance  with the credit concentration norm as stated  in the
Master Circular DNBS(PD).DNBS.(PD).CC.No.333/03.02.001/2013-14 dated  July 01, 2013
as amended from time to time;
(i) The AD may obtain a board resolution ‘
ex ante’
, passed by  the Board  of  Directors   of  the   investee company,  that  the   loan   proceeds received consequent to pledge of shares will be utilised  by the investee company for  the declared purpose; (ii) The AD may also  obtain a certificate ‘
ex post’
, from the statutory auditor of investee  company, that the loan proceeds received consequent to pledge of  shares, have been utilised by the investee  company for the declared purpose;
the Indian company has to  follow the relevant SEBI disclosure norms, as applicable;
under no circumstances, the credit  concentration norms should be breached by the NBFC. If there is a breach on  invocation of pledge, the shares should be sold and the breach shall be  rectified within a period of 30 days from the date of invocation of pledge.
3. Reserve Bank has since amended the Principal Regulations through the  Foreign Exchange Management (Transfer or Issue of Security by a Person Resident  outside India) (Sixth Amendment) Regulations, 2014 notified vide
Notification  No. FEMA.   305/2014-RB dated May 22,  2014
, c.f.  G.S.R. No.370(E)  dated  May 30, 2014.
4.  AD Category - I banks may bring the contents of this circular to the notice of  their constituents and customers concerned.
5..  The directions contained in this circular have been issued under sections 10(4)  and 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and are  without prejudice to permissions / approvals, if any, required under any other  law.
Yours  faithfully
(B.P. Kanungo)
Principal Chief General Manager