(55 kb)
Need for bank branches/ATMs to be made Accessible to persons with disabilities
RBI/2013-14/637
UBD.BPD.Cir.No. 70/13.03.000/2013-14
June 11, 2014
The Chief Executive Officer
All Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks
Dear Sir / Madam
Need for bank branches/ATMs to be made
Accessible to persons with disabilities
Please refer to our
circular  UBD.CO.BPD.(PCB) Cir. No.63/9.39.000/2008-09 dated April 29, 2009
on the  captioned subject, wherein banks were advised to provide, inter alia, ramps in  all existing and future ATMs, and make at least one third of new ATMs installed  as talking ATMs with Braille keypads. It was also advised to ensure that at  least one talking ATM with Braille keypad is generally available in each  locality for catering to the needs of visually impaired persons.
2. UCBs are now advised to take appropriate  steps to provide ramps at the entrance of the bank branches so that persons  with disabilities / wheel chair users can enter bank branches and conduct  business without difficulty. Banks are advised to report the progress made in  this regard periodically to their Board of Directors/Customer Service Committee  of the Board and ensure compliance. However, in cases where it is impracticable  to provide such ramp facilities, whether permanently fixed to earth or  otherwise, the requirement may be dispensed with, for reasons recorded or  displayed in branches or ATMs concerned.
3. It is observed that some banks have not yet  made at least one third of the new ATMs installed as talking ATMs with Braille  keypads as advised vide our circular referred to above. It is, therefore, advised  that banks should make all new ATMs installed from July 1, 2014 as talking ATMs  with Braille keypads and lay down a road map for converting existing ATMs as  talking ATMs with Braille keypads as advised in our circular dated April 24, 2009  ibid and the same may be reviewed from time to time by the Board of Directors/Customer  Service Committee of the Board.
4. In addition to the above, magnifying glasses  should also be provided in all bank branches for the use of persons with low  vision, wherever they require, for carrying out banking transactions with ease.  Branches should display at a prominent place notice about the availability of  magnifying glasses and other facilities available for persons with  disabilities.
Yours faithfully,
(P.K.Arora)
General Manager