(380 kb)
Reviewing the Reporting and Accounting Procedure of Relief and Savings Bonds - Revised Application format - 8% Savings (Taxable) Bonds, 2003
RBI/2013-14/654
DGBA.CDD. No. 6919/13.01.299/2013-14
June  12, 2014
The  Chairman/Managing Director
Head Office  (Government Accounts Department)
State Bank of India and  Associates
All Nationalised Banks
(Excluding Punjab and Sind  Bank and Andhra Bank)
Axis Bank Ltd./ HDFC Bank  Ltd./ICICI Bank Ltd.
Stock  Holding Corporation of India Ltd.(SHCIL)
Dear Sir/Madam
Reviewing  the Reporting and Accounting Procedure of Relief and Savings Bonds - Revised Application  format - 8% Savings (Taxable) Bonds, 2003
You  may recall the discussions we had in the meetings held on August 31, 2012 and  February 06, 2013 regarding migration of Relief/Savings Bonds operations to the  Core Banking Solution (CBS) Platforms of the banks. In order to migrate the  Relief/Savings Bond operations to CBS Platforms, it was felt necessary to use a  revised application format to fit into the new system after notifying the same by  the Government of India (GOI). After due consideration of the  comments/suggestions made by the banks, the revised application formats (bilingual  - Hindi and English) for 8% Savings (Taxable) Bonds, 2003 have been approved by  the Government of India and notified in the Gazette of India - Extraordinary - Part  I - Section -1, No. 104 on April 21, 2014,
copy of which is enclosed
for our  ready reference.
2. The  application formats for Cumulative and Non-Cumulative Bonds may be printed in  different colours for easy identification. While printing the forms following  instructions may please be kept in mind.
The  application forms should be bilingual, i.e. in Hindi and English
You  may use logo of your bank at the place provided in the application format
The  application forms should be printed on A-4 size paper only.
The  application forms must be printed on good quality paper.
The  information regarding savings bonds and duties and rights of the customers
must
be printed and perforated in such a manner that they can be easily detached  and taken away by the customer while leaving behind the application portion  with the bank/branch.
3. It  need not be emphasized that the time schedule for deliverables should be  strictly adhered to. Deviation, if any, will be viewed seriously by the Reserve  Bank of India.
4. Please  acknowledge the receipt and also confirm that the above instructions have been  implemented by you.
Yours  faithfully,
(R. K. Singh)
Deputy  General Manager
Encl.: As  above