(169 kb)
Master Circular on Inspection & Audit Systems in Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks
RBI/2014-15/18
UBD. CO.BPD.(PCB).MC.No.9/12.05.001/2014-15
July 1, 2014
Chief Executive Officers of
All Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks
Madam/Dear Sir
Master Circular on
Inspection & Audit Systems in Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks
Please refer to our
Master Circular  UBD.BPD.(PCB).MC.No.9/12.05.001/2013-14  dated July 1, 2013
on the captioned subject (available at RBI  website
www.rbi.org.in
). The enclosed
Master Circular
consolidates and  updates all the instructions / guidelines on the subject up to June 30, 2014.
Yours faithfully
(A.K.  Bera)
Principal Chief General  Manager
Master Circular on 
  Inspection & Audit Systems in
Primary (Urban)Co-op. Banks
Sr. No
Contents
1.
Introduction
2.
Ghosh Committee Recommendations on Internal Inspection and    Audit
2.1
Internal Audit Machinery
2.2
Periodicity of Internal audit
2.3
Coverage of Internal Audit
2.4
Supplementary Short Inspections
2.5
Revenue Audit
2.6
Credit Portfolio Audit
3.
Other Areas of importance
3.1
Investment Portfolio Audit
4
Concurrent Audit Systems
5
Audit for Electronic Data Processing (EDP) System
6
Information System(IS) Audit
7
Audit Committee of Board (Apex Audit Committee)
Annexure I
Note on Concurrent Audit System
Appendix
List of Circulars    Consolidated in the Master Circular
1.	INTRODUCTION
1.1 It has  been observed that quite often the internal inspection machinery in banks has  failed to highlight and pinpoint the existence of gross and serious  irregularities such as improper credit appraisal, disbursement without  observing the terms of sanction, failure to exercise proper post-disbursement  supervision, even suppression of information relating to unauthorised excess  drawals allowed, kite flying in bills and cheques, etc. or bring to light  frauds.
The internal inspection reports  rarely make any adverse comments on the failure of officials of  Controlling/Head Offices. The failure of the internal inspection machinery is  mainly attributable to the incompetence of the internal inspection personnel  the casual manner in which the work is carried out and lack of follow up of the  inspection. Personnel who cannot otherwise be deployed in other  sensitive/critical areas more often staff the inspection/audit department.
2. GHOSH COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATIONS ON INTERNAL INSPECTION AND AUDIT
The Reserve Bank of India had constituted a High Level  Committee, under the chairmanship of Shri A. Ghosh, the then Deputy Governor of  RBI, to enquire into the various aspects relating to frauds and malpractices in  banks. The Committee made a number of recommendations and suggested precautions  to be taken to avoid incidence of frauds and malpractices in the banks. Reserve  Bank of India  had examined these recommendations and some of the recommendations relevant to  the primary (urban) co-operative banks recommended for adoption by them are  indicated below:
2.1
Internal  Audit Machinery
Banks should introduce a sound system of internal  audit. With a view to strengthening the credibility of the inspection system in  detecting cases of frauds/malpractices, steps need to be taken to gear up the  inspection/audit machinery and to improve the quality of officers of the  inspection department. The head of the inspection department at the Head Office  should be a sufficiently senior person and should report directly to the  Chairman. If the bank has Regional Offices, there should be an audit machinery  under an official of sufficient seniority as the Regional Office Chief to  conduct the periodic audit of branches under its jurisdiction. The officers posted  to this department should have sufficient experience and exposure and the  department should be headed by an official of sufficient seniority and proven  integrity. In order to attract competent staff to the department, minimum,  continuous experience of three years in Inspection Department should be made as  a prerequisite for promotion to senior level.
2.2
Periodicity of Internal Audit
The periodicity of the internal audit of the branches  should be at least once in every 12 months, which should be really of surprise  character.
2.3
Coverage of Internal Audit
2.3.1 The coverage of such inspections should also  be made more comprehensive,
inter alia
,  to include a thorough examination of the internal control system obtaining at  the branches including the various periodical control returns submitted to the  controlling offices. The internal inspection report should specifically  comment, on the position of irregularities pointed out in the inspection report  of Reserve Bank of India.  The inspection/audit officials should also critically analyse and make in-depth  study of the corruption/fraud prone areas such as appraisal of credit  proposals, balancing of books, reconciliation of inter-branch accounts,  settlement of clearing transactions, suspense accounts, premises and stationery  accounts during the course of inspections leaving no scope for any  malpractices/irregularities remaining undetected.
2.3.2 The  internal inspector should scrutinise the suspense account during inspection / visit  and give specific instructions for early reversal of entries.
2.3.3 The  banks should ensure that the system evolved for recording the details of  off-balance sheet transactions are properly followed by all branches. These  records should be periodically balanced and internal inspectors should verify  the same and offer critical comments.
2.3.4 Proper  inventory of dead stock articles, stationery should be maintained and subjected  to surprise check at periodical intervals by the officials of the branch as  also internal inspectors.
2.3.5 Compliance with Prudential Norms
Internal  auditors should bring out non-compliance with the prudential norms relating  to income recognition, asset classification and provisioning for taking suitable  action in the matter.
2.3.6 Cheque  Purchase Transactions
The  internal inspectors should verify all the cheque purchased/discounted beyond  the sanctioned limit. They should be  asked to conduct a sample checking of transactions.
2.4
Supplementary Inspections/Audit
The annual internal inspection may be supplemented by  surprise short inspections,revenue audit, credit portfolio audit etc. in larged  sized banks. Surprise short inspection may be carried out by officials at appropriate  higher levels to ensure that branch officials are not indulging in malafide  practices.
2.5
Revenue Audit
The reasons of leakage of income unearthed during such  audit should be examined in-depth and action taken against the officials  responsible for the lapses.
2.6
Credit Portfolio Audit
2.6.1 A  system of exclusive scrutiny of credit portfolio with focus on larger advances  and group exposures at regular intervals may be introduced in large sized UCBs.  A special scrutiny of high value accounts shifted to the bank along with  executives/officials including General Managers/ Chief Executive Officer/  Managing Directors transferred from other banks should be done. Similarly the  accounts transferred from other branches along with the officials should be  subjected to thorough scrutiny during the internal inspection. The summary of  the important findings may be submitted to the Committee of the Board.
3. OTHER AREAS OF IMPORTANCE
3.1
Investment Portfolio Audit
Primary (urban) co-operative banks are required to  include the following measures in respect of investment portfolio audit:
3.1.1 The  reconciliation of the balances of SGL transfer forms as per bank’s books should  be periodically checked by the internal audit department.
3.1.2 In view  of the possibility of abuse, purchase and sale of government securities etc.  should be separately subjected to audit by internal auditors (and in the  absence of internal auditors by Chartered Accountants out of the panel  maintained by the Registrar of Co-operative Societies) and the results of their  audit should be placed before the Board of Directors once every quarter.
3.1.3 The audit  should  scrutinise that:
Adherence to the aggregate  upper contract limit for each of the approved brokers is within a limit of 5%  of total transactions (both purchase and sales) entered into by the bank during  a year.
that disproportionate  part of the business is not transacted through only one or a few brokers and  that aggregate contract limits for each of the approved brokers are not  exceeded. The limit should cover both the business initiated by the bank and  the business offered/brought to the bank by broker. The business put through  any individual broker or brokers in excess of the limit of 5% of total  transactions entered into by the bank during the year with the reasons  therefor, should be covered in the half-yearly review to the Board of Directors  ; and
The deals have been undertaken in the best interest  of the bank.
4 CONCURRENT AUDIT SYSTEM
4.1 Ghosh  Committee had recommended introduction of concurrent audit at large and  exceptionally large branches of banks to serve as administrative support to  branches, help in adherence to prescribed systems and procedures and prevention  and timely detection of lapses/irregularities. Concurrent Audit which was  introduced in all scheduled and other primary (urban) co-operative banks with  deposits over Rs.50 crore was extended to all UCBs  based on the recommendations of the Joint  Parliamentary Committee (JPC), which enquired into stock market scam and  matters relating thereto.
4.2 The concurrent audit system is to  be regarded as part of a bank's early-warning system to ensure timely detection  of irregularities and lapses, which helps in preventing fraudulent transactions  at branches. It is, therefore, necessary for the bank's management to bestow  serious attention to the implementation of various aspects of the system such  as selection of branches, coverage of business operations, appointment of  auditors, appropriate reporting procedures, follow-up/rectification processes  and utilisation of the feed-back from the system for appropriate and quick  management decisions.
4.3 The Board should once in a year  review the effectiveness of the system and take necessary measures to correct  the lacunae in the system,
4.4 It is basically for the  individual banks' managements to decide the details of the concurrent audit  system. However, a note indicating the broad features of concurrent audit  system is given in
Annex 1
for the guidance of the banks. The note broadly defines the  concept and scope of concurrent audit, such as converge of business/branches,  types of activities to be covered during the audit reporting system. The note  also details the broad suggestions in respect of various aspects of concurrent  audit.
4.5 It is  expected that the suggestions in the note would ensure some uniformity in the  systems to be introduced by different banks. While framing a concurrent audit  system, the banks may clearly spell out the linkages between different forms of  internal inspections and audits already in existence and the proposed  concurrent audit.
4.6 The concurrent  auditors shall certify that the investments held by the bank as on the last  reporting Friday of each quarter as reported to the Reserve Bank of India are  actually owned / held by it as evidenced by physical securities or the  custodians statement. The certificate should be submitted to the Regional  Office of the Reserve Bank of India,  having jurisdiction over the bank, within thirty days from the end of the  relative quarter.
4.7 The concurrent auditors should specifically verify  compliance to the instructions contained in our
circular UBD.BPD.SUB No.5/  09.80.00/ 2003-04 dated 28 April 2004
regarding transactions in Govt.  Securities.
4.8 Serious irregularities brought out in the  concurrent audit report should be immediately reported to the Regional Office  concerned of this department.
4.9 Chartered Accountants / audit firms associated with the bank  for internal /   concurrent audit  assignments should not undertake statutory audit assignment during the same  period. The firms associated with internal / concurrent audit should relinquish  the internal / concurrent audit before accepting the statutory audit assignment  during the year.
5 AUDIT FOR ELECTRONIC DATA PROCESSING SYSTEM:
5.1 Primary (urban) co-operative banks which have partially / fully  computerised their operations should introduce EDP audit system on perpetual  basis. The EDP audit cell should be constituted as part of their Inspection and  Audit Department in banks having an independent Inspection and Audit Department  and other primary (urban) co-operative banks, which do not have an independent  Inspection & Audit Department, should create a dedicated group of persons,  who can perform functions of an EDP Auditor. Entire domain of EDP activities  (from policy to implementation) should be brought under scrutiny of Inspection  and Audit Department. The overall control and supervision of these EDP Audit  Cells should be vested in the Audit Committees. Financial outlay as well as  activities to be performed by EDP department should be reviewed by senior  management at periodical intervals.
Primary (Urban)  Co-operative Banks may comply with following guidelines while carrying out EDP  Audit.
5.2 A team of competent and  motivated EDP personnel may be developed in order to take care of a possible  exodus of key personnel. EDP auditors' technical knowledge should be augmented  on a continuing basis through deputation to seminars/conferences, supply of  technical periodicals and books etc.
5.3 Duties of system  programmer/designer should not be assigned to persons operating the system.  System person would only make modifications /improvements to programs and the  operating persons would only use such programs without having the right to make  any modifications. In order to bring about uniformity of software used by  various branches/offices there should be a formal method of incorporating  change in standard software and it should be approved by senior management.  Inspection and Audit Department should verify such changes from the view-point  of control and for its implementation in other branches in order to maintain  uniformity.
5.4 Major factors which lead to security violations in  computers include inadequate or incomplete system design, programming errors,  weak or inadequate logical access controls, absent or poorly designed  procedural controls, ineffective employee supervision and management controls.  These may be plugged by:
strengthening  physical, logical and procedural access to system;
introducing standards for quality  assurance and periodically testing and checking them; and
screening employees prior to induction  into EDP application areas and keeping a watch on their behavioral pattern.
putting in place appropriate control measures  to protect the computer system from attacks of unscrupulous  elements.
5.5 Replacement of manual procedures by  computer applications should be done after a parallel run of the system and  ensuring that all aspects of security, reliability and accessibility of data.
5.6 In order to ensure that the EDP  applications have resulted in a consistent and reliable system for inputting of  data, processing and generation of output, various tests to identify erroneous  processing, to assess the quality of data, to identify inconsistent data and to  compare data with physical forms should be introduced.
5.7 The bank should make a formal declaration of system  development methodology, programming and documentation standards to be  followed, compliance should be verified by EDP Auditors.
5.8 Contingency plans/procedures  in case of failure of system should be introduced/ tested at periodic  intervals. EDP auditor should put such contingency plan under test during the  audit for evaluating the effectiveness of such plans.
5.9 While  engaging outside computer agencies, banks should ensure to incorporate the  "clause of visitorial rights" in the contract, so as to have the  right to inspect the process of application and also ensure the security of the  data/inputs given to such outside agencies.
6.            INFORMATION SYSTEM (IS) AUDIT
UCBs have adopted technology and have been offering electronic banking,  tele banking, electronic clearing/funds transfer, electronic money, smart cards  etc to its customers.  In view of the  above and having regard to risks emanating from adoption of technology, there  is a need to introduce IS Audit in UCBs. It is, therefore, advised that
(i) UCBs may adopt an IS audit  policy, if  not already done, appropriate  to its level of  operations, complexity  of business and level of computerization   and review the same at regular intervals in tune with guidelines issued  by RBI from time to time.
(ii) UCBs may  also adopt appropriate systems and practices for conducting IS audit on annual  basis covering all the critically important branches (in terms of nature and  volume of business).
(iii) Such  audits should be undertaken preferably prior to the statutory audit so that IS  audit reports are available to the statutory auditors well in time for  examination and  for incorporating  comments, if any, in the audit reports.
(iv) IS audit  reports should be placed before the board and compliance should be ensured  within the time frame as outlined in the audit policy.
(v) The above instructions may be implemented during  the current accounting year beginning from April 1, 2014 to March 31, 2015.
7.  		AUDIT COMMITTEE OF BOARD (APEX AUDIT COMMITTEE)
7.1 The Reserve Bank of India has, from  time to time, emphasised the need on the part of the directors of the primary  (urban) co-operative banks to ensure timely review and action on the findings  of statutory inspection/audit reports and submission of the compliance reports  thereto. Yet, in most of the banks, there is no proper system to examine and  follow-up the observations and suggestions made in the inspection reports of  Reserve Bank of India, statutory auditors and those submitted by the internal  inspection department, vigilance cell and internal auditors. Timely follow-up  action on the findings of inspection reports and guidelines, circulars etc.  issued by RBI as also the internal audit/inspection, etc. is considered  desirable to tone up the overall functioning and operational efficiency of the  banks.
7.2 In  order to ensure and enhance the effectiveness of internal audit/inspection as a  management tool, it is considered necessary that an Apex Audit Committee should  be set up at the Board level for overseeing and providing direction to the  internal audit/inspection machinery and other executives of primary (urban)  co-operative banks. The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors (ACB) may  consist of the Chairman and three/four Directors, one or more of such Directors  being Chartered Accountants or persons having experience in management,  finance, accountancy and audit system, etc. This also implies that the banks  need to constitute, wherever necessary, their Boards with an adequate number of  such professionals.
7.3 The  Audit Committee of the Board should review the implementation of the guidelines  issued by RBI and submit a note thereon, to the Board at quarterly intervals.
7.4 The  other duties/ responsibilities of the Audit Committee of Board (ACB) are as  follows:
7.4.1 ACB should provide direction and  oversee the operations of the total audit function in the bank.  The total audit function will imply the  organization, operationalisation and quality control of internal audit and  inspection within the bank and follow-up on the statutory audit of the bank and  inspection of the Reserve Bank.
7.4.2 As  regards internal audit, ACB should review the internal inspection/audit  function in the bank - the system, its quality and effectiveness in terms of  follow up. It should review the follow up action on the internal inspection  reports, particularly of "unsatisfactory" branches and branches  classified by the bank as extra large branches. It should also specially focus  on the follow up on:
Inter-branch  adjustment accounts.
Unreconciled long outstanding  entries in inter-branch accounts and inter-bank accounts.
Arrears in balancing of books at  various branches.
Frauds.
All other major areas of  housekeeping.
Compliance with the Statutory Audit Reports/Concurrent  Audit Reports/RBI inspection reports.
Omission on the part of   internal inspecting officials to detect serious irregularities should be  viewed seriously.
Periodical review of the accounting policies/systems  in the bank with a view to ensuring greater transparency in the bank's accounts  and adequacy of accounting controls.
Annex- 1
Master  Circular
Inspection  & Audit Systems in
Primary (Urban) Co-op.  Banks
[Vide para 4.4]
Note on Concurrent Audit
1.	 	INTRODUCTION
1.1 	A High level Committee set up by the Reserve Bank of India at the instance of Government of India under the chairmanship of Shri A. Ghosh, the then Deputy Governor, to enquire into various aspects of frauds and malpractices in banks, had recommended in its report, submitted in June 1992 that a system of Concurrent Audit should be introduced at large and exceptionally large branches to serve as administrative support to branches, help in adherence to prescribed systems and procedures and timely detection of lapses/irregularities. An informal group set up by the Reserve Bank of India comprising senior officers of some large commercial banks and the representatives from the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India examined the various aspects connected with the system. The views that emerged in the Group's discussions are detailed below which could be considered for adoption by primary (urban) co-operative banks.
2.  		SCOPE OF CONCURRENT AUDIT
2.1 	Concurrent audit is an examination, which is contemporaneous with the occurrence of transactions or is carried out as near thereto as possible. It attempts to shorten the interval between a transaction and its examination by an independent person not involved in its documentation. There is an emphasis in favour of substantive checking in key areas rather than test checking.
2.2 	A concurrent auditor may not sit in judgement of the decision taken by bank/branch Manager or an authorised official. However, the auditor will necessarily have to see whether the transactions or decisions are within the policy parameters laid down by the Head Office/Board of Directors, they do not violate the instructions or policy prescriptions of the Reserve Bank of India and that they are within the delegated authority and in compliance with the terms and conditions for exercise of delegated authority.
3 	COVERAGE OF BUSINESS/BRANCHES
3.1 	The suggested coverage may be as under:
3.1.1 	The Departments/Divisions at the Head Office dealing with treasury functions viz. investments, funds management including inter-bank borrowings, bill rediscount, in stock invest scheme, credit card system and foreign exchange business are to be subjected to concurrent audit. In addition, all branch offices undertaking such business, as also large branches and dealing rooms have to be subjected to continuous audit.
3.1.2 	The problem branches, which are continuously getting poor or very poor rating in the bank’s annual inspection/audit and where the house keeping is extremely poor may be covered.
3.1.3 	Banks may also include additional branches at their discretion on the basis of need; that is their professional judgement about the overall functioning of the branches.
4 	TYPES OF ACTIVITIES TO BE COVERED
4.1 	The main role of the concurrent audit is to supplement the efforts of the bank in carrying out simultaneous internal check of the transactions and other verifications and compliance with the procedures laid down. In particular, it
      should be seen that the transactions are properly recorded/documented and vouched. The concurrent auditors may broadly cover the following items:
4.1.1 	Cash
4.1.1.1 	Daily cash transactions with particular reference to any abnormal receipts and payments.
4.1.1.2 	Proper accounting of inward and outward cash remittances.
4.1.1.3	Proper accounting of currency chest transactions (if any), its prompt reporting to Reserve Bank of India
4.1.1.4	Expenses incurred by cash payment involving sizeable amount.
4.1.2 	Investments
4.1.2.1	Ensure that in respect of purchase and sale of securities, the branch has acted within its delegated power having regard to its Head Office instructions.
4.1.2.2	Ensure that the securities held in the books of the branch are physically held by it.
4.1.2.3	Ensure that the branch is complying with the RBI/Head Office/Board guidelines regarding BRs, SGL forms, delivery of scrips, documentation and accounting
4.1.2.4	Ensure that the sale or purchase transactions are done at rates beneficial to the bank.
4.1.3 	Deposits
4.1.3.1	Check the transactions about deposits received and repaid.
4.1.3.2	Percentage check of interest paid on deposits may be made, including calculation of interest on large deposits
4.1.3.3	Check new accounts opened. Operations in new Current/SB accounts may be verified in the initial period itself to see whether there are any unusual operations. Also examine whether the formalities connected with the opening of new accounts have been followed as per RBI instructions.
4.1.4 	Advances
4.1.4.1	Ensure that loans and advances have been sanctioned properly (i.e. after due scrutiny and at the appropriate level).
4.1.4.2	Verify whether the sanctions are in accordance with delegated authority.
4.1.4.3	Ensure that securities and documents have been received and properly charged/registered.
4.1.4.4	Ensure that post disbursement, supervision and follow-up is proper, such as receipt of stock statement, instalments, renewal of limits, etc.
4.1.4.5	Verify whether there is any misutilisation of the loans and advances and whether there are instances indicative of diversion of funds.
4.1.4.6	Check whether the letters of credit issued by the branch are within the delegated power and ensure that they are for genuine trade transactions.
4.1.4.7 	Check the bank guarantees issued, whether they have been properly worded and recorded in the register of the bank. Whether they have been promptly renewed on the due dates.
4.1.4.8  	Ensure proper follow-up of overdue bills of exchange.
4.1.4.9  	Verify whether the classification of advances has been done as per RBI guidelines.
4.1.4.10 	Verify whether the submission of claims to ECGC is in time.
4.1.4.11 	Verify that instances of exceeding delegated powers have been promptly reported to Controlling/Head Office/Board by the branch and have been got confirmed or ratified at the required level
4.1.4.12 	Verify the frequency and genuineness of such exercise of authority beyond the delegated powers by the concerned officials.
4.1.5 	Foreign Exchange transactions
4.1.5.1	Check foreign bills negotiated under letters of credit.
4.1.5.2	Check FCNR and other non-resident accounts, whether the debits and credits are permissible under the rules.
4.1.5.3		Check whether inward/outward remittance have been properly accounted for.
4.1.5.4	Examine extension and cancellation of forward contracts for purchase and sale of foreign currency. Ensure that they are duly authorised and necessary charges have been recovered.
4.1.5.5	Ensure that balances in Nostro accounts in different foreign currencies are within the limit as prescribed by the Bank.
4.1.5.6	Ensure that the overbought/oversold position maintained in different currencies is reasonable, taking into account the foreign exchange operations.
4.1.5.7	Ensure adherence to the guidelines issued by RBI/HO of the bank about dealing room operations
4.1.5.8	Ensure verification/reconciliation of Nostro and Vostro account transactions/ balances.
4.1.6 	Housekeeping
4.1.6.1	Ensure that the maintenance and balancing of accounts, Ledgers and registers including clean cash and general ledger is proper.
4.1.6.2	Ensure prompt reconciliation of entries outstanding in the inter-branch and inter-bank accounts, Suspense Accounts, Sundry Deposits Account, Drafts Accounts, etc. Ensure early adjustment of large value entries.
4.1.6.3	Carryout a percentage check of calculations of interest, discount, commission and exchange.
4.1.6.4	Check whether debits in income account have been permitted by the competent authorities.
4.1.6.5	Check the transactions of staff accounts.
4.1.6.6	In case of difference in clearing, there is a tendency to book it in an intermediary suspense account instead of locating the difference. Examine the day book to verify as to how the differences in clearing have been adjusted. Such instances should be reported to Head Office/Board of Directors in case the difference persists.
4.1.6.7 Detection and prevention of revenue leakages through close examination of income and expenditure accounts/transactions.
4.1.6.8	Check cheques returned/bills returned register and look into reasons for return of those instruments.
4.1.6.9	Checking of inward and outward remittances (DDs. MTs and TTs).
4.1.7	Other items
4.1.7.1	Ensure that the branch gives proper compliance to the internal inspection/audit reports.
4.1.7.2	Ensure that customer complaints are dealt with promptly
4.1.7.3	Verification of statements, HO returns, statutory returns.
4.2 	The aforesaid list is illustrative and not exhaustive. The banks may, therefore, add other items to the list, which in their opinion are useful for the purpose of proper control of the branch operations. In the context of volume of transactions in the large branches it may not be always possible for the concurrent auditors to do a cent percent check. They may, therefore, consider adopting the following norms:
4.2.1	In certain areas, such as off balance sheet items (LCs and BGs), investment portfolio, foreign exchange transactions, fraud prone/sensitive areas, advances having outstanding balances of more than Rs. 5 lakhs, if any unusual feature is observed, the concurrent auditors may conduct cent percent check.
4.2.2	In the case of areas such as income and expenditure items, inter-bank and inter-branch accounting, interest paid and interest received, clearing transactions, and deposit accounts, the check can be restricted to 10 to 25 per cent of the number of transactions.
4.2.3	Where any branch has poor performance in certain areas or requires close monitoring in housekeeping, loans and advances or investments, the concurrent auditors may carry out intensive checking of such areas.
4.2.4	Concurrent auditors may concentrate on high value transactions having financial implication for the bank rather than those involving lesser amount, although number-wise they may be large.
4.2.5	If any adverse remark is required to be given, the concurrent auditors should give reasons therefore.
4.2.6	Concurrent auditors may themselves identify problem areas at branch level/bank and offer their suggestions to overcome them.
5.  		APPOINTMENT AND REMUNERATION OF AUDITOR
5.1	The option to consider whether the concurrent audit should be done by the external auditors (professionally qualified Chartered Accountants) or its own staff may be left to the individual banks. In case bank decides to appoint external auditors for the purpose, the terms of their appointment and remuneration to be paid may be fixed by the banks within the broad guidelines approved by the Board and/or by the Registrar of Co-operative Societies of the State concerned.
5.2	The audit firms will be responsible for any omissions or commissions in respect of transactions seen by them. In case any serious act of omission or commission is noticed in the working of the concurrent auditors (external), the bank may consider terminating their appointment and a report may be made to the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India for such action as they deem fit under intimation to RBI/RCS.
5.3 	In case the bank prefers to entrust the audit to its own officers, the bank has to ensure that these officers are well experienced and of sufficient seniority in order to exercise necessary independence and objectivity while conducting concurrent audit. It would be desirable and necessary to rotate the auditors, whether internal or external, periodically. Progressively, it may be considered whether reliance on external auditors may be reduced as soon as requisite skills for audit work are developed by the proper selection and training of officers from within.
6.		REPORTING SYSTEM
6.1 	The concurrent auditors may report the minor irregularities, wrong calculations etc. to the Branch Manager for an on-the-spot rectification and reporting compliance.
6.2  	If these irregularities are not rectified within a reasonable period of time say a week, these may be reported to the head office. If the auditors observe any serious irregularities, these should be straight away reported to Head Office immediately. The auditor will have to lay emphasis on the propriety aspect of the audit. Banks may institute an appropriate system of follow-up of the reports of the concurrent auditors. There must be a system of annual review of the working of concurrent audit.
7.		CONCLUSION
While instituting the concurrent audit system, the attempt should be to integrate the same with other systems of internal audit/inspections, which are already in existence. One of the drawbacks hitherto has been non-integration of the different systems of internal audit and inspections and lack of response to audit objections/qualifications. It is necessary that the entire system of audit, inspection and their follow-up is properly documented and the performance of the integrated audit system is reviewed from time to time.
Appendix
Master Circular  on Inspection & Audit Systems in Primary (Urban) Co-op. Banks
List of Circulars consolidated in the Master Circular
Sr No
Circular No.
Date
Subject
1.
UBD.CO.BPD.71/12.09.000/2013-14
11.06.2014
Introduction of Information System(IS) Audit for Urban    Cooperative Banks
2.
UBD.CO.BPD.35/12.05.001/2008-09
21.01.2009
Internal assignments in banks by statutory    auditors
3.
UBD.BPD.SUB.CIR.5/09.80.00/2003-04
28.04.2004
Transactions in    Government Securities
4.
UBD.BSD.IP.No.39/12.05.01/2003 - 04
20.03.2004
Concurrent Audit –    Serious Irregularities
5.
BPD.Cir.36/09.06.00/    2002-03
20.02.2003
Concurrent Audit
6.
BPD.    Cir.37/09.06.00/2002-03
06.03.2003
7.
UBD.No.BSD.    I SCB.4/12.05.01/2000-01
10.04.2001
8.
UBD.No.Plan.SUB.20/    09.81.00/97-98
19.02.1998
9.
UBD.No.Plan(PCB)Cir.    32/ 09.06.00/96-97
05.12.1996
10.
UBD.    No. Plan PCB.19/09.29.00/96-97
11.09.1996
11.
UBD.    No. Plan /PCB/69/09.29.00/95-96
21.06.1996
12.
UBD.No.Plan    (PCB).9/09.06.00/94-95
25.07.1994
13.
UBD.    No. POT.77/09.06.00/93-94
31.05.1994
14.
UBD.    No. Plan.74/UB. 81-92/93
17.05.1993
15.
UBD.    No. I & L. 21/J -1-87/88
20.07.1987
B. List of other  circulars from which instructions relating to Inspection & Audit Systems in  Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks have also been consolidated in the Master  Circular
Sr. No.
Circular    No.
Date
Subject
1.
UBD.No.CO.BSD.I PCB.44/12.05.05/2000-2001
23.04.2001
Guidelines for classification and Valuation of    Investment by Banks
2.
UBD.No.POT.Cir.PCB.39/09.29.00/2000-2001
18.04.2001
Sale of Government Securities allotted in the    auction of Primary Issues
3
UBD.No.Plan.SUB.20/09.81.00/97-98
19.02.1998
Retailing of    Government Securities
4
UBD. 21/12:15:00/93-94
21.09.1993
Committee to enquire into various aspects relating    to frauds and malpractices in banks - Primary (Urban) Co-operative banks
5
UBD. No. Plan.13/UB.81/92-93
15.09.1992
Investments portfolio of banks - Transactions in securities
6
UBD. No. 2420 - J.20-83/84
02.04.1984
Frauds, Misappropriation, Embezzlements and    Defalcation of Funds in Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks