(105 kb)
Master Circular - Fair Practices Code
RBI/2014-15/34
DNBS  (PD) CC No.388/03.10.042/2014-15
July  1, 2014
(As updated on  October 30, 2014)
To
All Non-Banking Financial  Companies (NBFCs)
and  Residuary Non-Banking Companies (RNBCs)
Dear Sirs,
Master  Circular - Fair Practices Code
In order to have all current instructions on the  subject in one place, the Reserve Bank of India has consolidated all the  instructions issued on the topic as on June 30, 2014. The
Master Circular
has  also been placed on the RBI web-site (
http://www.rbi.org.in
).
Yours faithfully,
(K.K.Vohra)
Principal Chief General Manager
Table of Contents
Para
          No.
Particulars
1.
Introduction
2.
Guidelines on Fair Practices Code for NBFCs
A
i. Applications for loans and their processing
ii. Loan appraisal    and terms/conditions
iii. Disbursement    of loans including changes in terms and conditions
iv. General
v. Responsibility    of Board of Directors
vi. Grievance RedressalOfficer
vii. Language and    mode of communicating Fair Practices    Code
viii. Regulation of excessive interest charged by NBFCs
ix. Complaints about excessive interest charged by NBFCs
x. Clarification regarding repossession of vehicles financed by NBFCs
B
NBFC-MFI
i. General
ii. Disclosures in    loan agreement / loan card
iii. Non-Coercive Methods of Recovery
iv. Internal    control system
C
Lending against collateral of    gold jewellery
i. Board approved    policy for lending against gold
ii. Auction    Procedure
Appendix
1. Introduction
The Reserve Bank vide  its circular dated September 28, 2006, issued guidelines on Fair Practices Code  (FPC) for all NBFCs to be adopted by them while doing lending business. The  guidelines inter alia, covered general principles on adequate disclosures on the  terms and conditions of a loan and also adopting a non-coercive recovery  method.
1
The  same was revised in view of the recent developments with sector including  creation of New Category of NBFCs viz; NBFC-MFI and also the rapid growth in  NBFCs lending against gold jewellery. Revised circular was issued on March 26,  2012.
2. Guidelines on  Fair Practices Code for NBFCs
A. (i) Applications for loans and their processing
(a) All communications to the borrower shall be in the vernacular language  or a language as understood by the borrower.
(b) Loan application forms should include necessary information which  affects the interest of the borrower, so that a meaningful comparison with the  terms and conditions offered by other NBFCs can be made and informed decision  can be taken by the borrower. The loan application form may indicate the  documents required to be submitted with the application form.
(c) The NBFCs should devise a system of giving acknowledgement for receipt  of all loan applications. Preferably, the time frame within which loan  applications will be disposed of should also be indicated in the  acknowledgement.
(ii)
Loan appraisal and terms/conditions
The NBFCs should convey in writing to the  borrower in the vernacular language as understood by the borrower by means of  sanction letter or otherwise, the amount of loan sanctioned along with the  terms and conditions including annualised rate of interest and method of  application thereof and keep the acceptance of these terms and conditions by  the borrower on its record.
As complaints received against NBFCs generally  pertain to charging of high interest / penal interest, NBFCs shall mention the  penal interest charged for late repayment in bold in the loan agreement.
It  is understood that in a few cases, borrowers are not fully aware of the terms  and conditions of the loans including rate of interestat the time of sanction  of loans, either because the NBFC does not provide details of the same or the  borrower has no time to look into detailed agreement. Not furnishing a copy of  the loan agreement or enclosures quoted in the loan agreement is an unfair  practice and this could lead to disputes between the NBFC and the borrower with  regard to the terms and conditions. NBFCs are, therefore, advised to furnish a  copy of the loan agreement as understood by the borrower along with a copy each  of all enclosures quoted in the loan agreement to
all
the borrowers at  the time of sanction / disbursement of loans.
(iii)
Disbursement of loans including changes in  terms and conditions
(a) The  NBFCs should give notice to the borrower in the vernacular language or a  language as understood by the borrower of any change in the terms and  conditions including disbursement schedule, interest rates, service charges,  prepayment charges etc. NBFCs should  also ensure that changes in interest rates and charges are effected only  prospectively. A suitable condition in  this regard should be incorporated in the loan agreement.
(b) Decision  to recall / accelerate payment or performance under the agreement should be in  consonance with the loan agreement.
(c) NBFCs should release all securities on  repayment of all dues or on realisation of the outstanding amount of loan  subject to any legitimate right or lien for any other claim NBFCs may have  against borrower. If such right of set off is to be exercised, the borrower  shall be given notice about the same with full particulars about the remaining claims  and the conditions under which NBFCs are entitled to retain the securities till  the relevant claim is settled/paid.
(iv)
General
(a) NBFCs  should refrain from interference in the affairs of the borrower except for the  purposes provided in the terms and conditions of the loan agreement (unless  information, not earlier disclosed by the borrower, has been noticed).
(b) In case of receipt of request from the  borrower for transfer of borrowal account, the consent or otherwise i.e.  objection of the NBFC, if any, should be conveyed within 21 days from the date  of receipt of request. Such transfer shall be as per transparent contractual  terms in consonance with law.
(c) In the matter of recovery of loans, the NBFCs  should not resort to undue harassment viz; persistently bothering the borrowers  at odd hours, use muscle power for recovery of loans etc.
As complaints from  customers also include rude behavior from the staff of the companies, NBFCs  shall ensure that the staff are adequately trained to deal with the customers  in an appropriate manner.
(d)
2
As a measure of customer protection and also in  order to bring in uniformity with regard to prepayment of various loans by borrowers  of banks and NBFCs, it is advised that NBFCs shall not charge foreclosure  charges/ pre-payment penalties on all floating rate term loans sanctioned to
individual  borrowers
, with immediate effect.
(v)
Responsibilty of Board of Directors
The Board of Directors of NBFCs should  also lay down the appropriate grievance redressal mechanism within the  organization. Such a mechanism should ensure that all disputes arising out of  the decisions of lending institutions' functionaries are heard and disposed of  at least at the next higher level. The Board of Directors should also provide  for periodical review of the compliance of the Fair Practices Code and the  functioning of the grievances redressal mechanism at various levels of  management. A consolidated report of such reviews may be submitted to the Board  at regular intervals, as may be prescribed by it.
(vi)
3
Grievance Redressal Officer
At the operational level, all  NBFCs have to display the following information prominently, for the benefit of  their customers, at their branches / places where business is transacted:
(a) the name and contact details (Telephone / Mobile nos. as also email address) of the Grievance  Redressal Officer who can be approached by the public for resolution of complaints  against the Company.
(b) If the complaint / dispute is not redressed within a  period of one month, the customer may appeal to the Officer-in-Charge of the  Regional Office of DNBS of RBI (complete contact details), under whose  jurisdiction the registered office of the NBFC falls.
In short,  the public notice should serve the purpose of highlighting to the customers,  the grievance redressal mechanism followed by the company, together with  details of the grievance redressal  officer and of the Regional Office of the RBI.
(vii)
Language  and mode of communicating Fair Practice Code
Fair Practices Code (which should  preferably in the vernacular languageor a language as understood by the  borrower) based on the guidelines outlined hereinabove should be put in place  by all NBFCs with the approval of their Boards within one month from the date  of issue of this circular. NBFCs will have the freedom of drafting the Fair  Practices Code, enhancing the scope of the guidelines but in no way sacrificing  the spirit underlying the above guidelines. The same should be put up on their  web-site, if any, for the information of various stakeholders.
(viii)
Regulation of excessive interest  charged by NBFCs
(a) The Board of each  NBFC shall adopt an interest rate model taking into account relevant factors  such as cost of funds, margin and risk premium and determine the rate of  interest to be charged for loans and advances. The rate of interest and the  approach for gradations of risk and rationale for charging different rate of  interest to different categories of borrowers shall be disclosed to the  borrower or customer in the application form and communicated explicitly in the  sanction letter.
(b) The rates of interest and the approach for  gradation of risks shall also be made available on the web-site of the companies  or published in the relevant newspapers. The information published in the  website or otherwise published should be updated whenever there is a change in  the rates of interest.
(c) The rate of interest should be annualised rate so that the borrower is aware of  the exact rates that would be charged to the account.
(ix)
4
Complaints about excessive interest charged  by NBFCs
The Reserve Bank has been receiving  several complaints regarding levying of excessive interest and charges on  certain loans and advances by NBFCs. Though interest rates are not regulated by  the Bank, rates of interest beyond a certain level may be seen to be excessive  and can neither be sustainable nor be conforming to normal financial practice. Boards  of NBFCs are, therefore, advised to lay out appropriate internal principles and  procedures in determining interest rates and processing and other charges. In  this regard the guidelines indicated in the Fair Practices Code about  transparency in respect of terms and conditions of the loans are to be kept in  view.
(x)
5
Clarification  regarding repossession of vehicles financed by NBFCs
NBFCs must have a built in re-possession  clause in the contract/loan agreement with the borrower which must be legally  enforceable. To ensure transparency, the terms and conditions of the  contract/loan agreement should also contain provisions regarding: (a) notice period before taking possession;  (b) circumstances under which the notice period can be waived; (c) the  procedure for taking possession of the security; (d) a provision regarding  final chance to be given to the borrower for repayment of loan before the sale  / auction of the property; (e) the procedure for giving repossession to the  borrower; and (f) the procedure for sale / auction of the property. A copy of  such terms and conditions must be made available to the borrower in terms of  circular wherein it was stated that NBFCs may invariably furnish a copy of the  loan agreement along with a copy each of all enclosures quoted in the loan  agreement to all the borrowers at the time of sanction / disbursement of loans,  which may form a key component of such contracts/loan agreements.
B. NBFC-MFIs
In addition to the  general principles as above, NBFC-MFIs shall adopt the following fair practices  that are specific to their lending business and regulatory framework.
(i)
General
(a) The FPC in vernacular language shall be displayed by an NBFC-MFI in its  office and branch premises,
(b) A statement shall be made in vernacular language and displayed by  NBFC-MFIs in their premises and in loan cards articulating their commitment to  transparency and fair lending practices,
(c) Field staff shall be  trained to make necessary enquiries with regard to existing debt of the  borrowers,
(d) Training if any, offered to the  borrowers shall be free of cost. Field staff shall be trained to offer such  training and also make the borrowers fully aware of the procedure and systems  related to loan / other products,
(e) The effective rate of interest charged and the grievance redressal system set  up by the NBFC-MFI should be prominently displayed in all its offices and in  the literature issued by it (in vernacular language) and on its website,
(f) A declaration that the MFI will be  accountable for preventing inappropriate staff behaviour and timely grievance  redressal shall be made in the loan agreement and also in the FPC displayed in  its office/branch premises,
(g)  The KYC Guidelines of RBI shall be complied with. Due diligence shall be  carried out to ensure the repayment capacity of the borrowers,
(h)  As specified in the NBFC-MFIs (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2011, all sanctions  and disbursement of loans should be done only at a central location and more  than one individual should be involved in this function. In addition, there  should be close supervision of the disbursement function,
(i) Adequate steps may be taken to ensure that the  procedure for application of loan is not cumbersome and loan disbursements are  done as per pre-determined time structure.
(ii)
Disclosures in loan agreement / loan card
(a) All NBFC-MFIs shall have a Board  approved, standard form of loan agreement. The loan agreement shall preferably  be in vernacular language.
(b) In the loan agreement the following shall be  disclosed:
all the terms and  conditions of the loan,
that the pricing  of the loan involves only three components viz; the interest charge, the  processing charge and the insurance premium (which includes the administrative  charges in respect thereof),
that there will  be no penalty charged on delayed payment,
that no Security  Deposit / Margin is being collected from the borrower,
that the borrower  cannot be a member of more than one SHG / JLG,
the moratorium  period between the grant of the loan and the due date of the repayment of the  first installment(as guided by the NBFC-MFIs (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2011),
an assurance that  the privacy of borrower data will be respected.
(c) The loan  card should reflect the following details as specified in the Non-Banking  Financial Company - Micro Finance Institutions (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2011:
the effective rate of interest charged,
all other terms and conditions attached to the loan,
information which adequately identifies the borrower and acknowledgements  by the NBFC-MFI of all repayments including installments received and the  final discharge,
The loan card should prominently mention the grievance redressal system  set up by the MFI and also the name and contact number of the nodal officer,
Non-credit products issued shall be with full consent of the borrowers  and fee structure shall be communicated in the loan card itself,
All entries in the Loan Card should be in the vernacular language.
(iii)
Non-Coercive Methods of  Recovery
As specified in the  NBFC-MFIs (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2011, recovery should normally be made  only at a central designated place. Field staff shall be allowed to make  recovery at the place of residence or work of the borrower only if borrower  fails to appear at central designated place on two or more successive  occasions.
NBFC-MFIs shall  ensure that a Board approved policy is in place with regard to Code of Conduct  by field staff and systems for their recruitment, training and supervision. The  Code should lay down minimum qualifications necessary for the field staff and  shall have necessary training tools identified for them to deal with the  customers. Training to field staff shall include programs to inculcate  appropriate behavior towards borrowers without adopting any abusive or coercive  debt collection / recovery practices.  Compensation methods for staff should have more emphasis on areas of  service and borrower satisfaction than merely the number of loans mobilized and  the rate of recovery. Penalties may also be imposed in cases of non-compliance by  field staff with the Code of conduct. Generally only employees and not out  sourced recovery agentsbe used for recovery in sensitive areas.
(iv)
Internal control system
As the primary  responsibility for compliance with the Directions rests with the NBFC-MFIs,  they shall make necessary organizational arrangements to assign responsibility  for compliance to designated individuals within the company and establish  systems of internal control including audit and periodic inspection to ensure  the same.
C. Lending against collateral of gold jewellery
While lending to individuals against gold jewellery,  NBFCs shall adopt the following in addition to the general guidelines as above.
(i)
They shall put in place Board approved  policy for lending against gold that should inter alia, cover the following
:
Adequate steps to ensure that the KYC guidelines stipulated by RBI are  complied with and to ensure that adequate due diligence is carried out on the  customer before extending any loan,
Proper assaying procedure for the jewellery received,
Internal systems to satisfy ownership of the gold jewellery,
Adequate systems for storing the jewellery in safe custody, reviewing  the systems on an on-going basis, training the concerned staff and periodic  inspection by internal auditors to ensure that the procedures are strictly  adhered to. Normally, such loans should not be extended by branches that do not  have appropriate facility for storage of the jewellery,
The jewellery accepted as collateral should be appropriately insured,
Transparent auction procedure in case of non-repayment with adequate  prior notice to the borrower. There should be no conflict of interest and the  auction process must ensure that there is arm’s length relationship in all  transactions during the auction including with group companies and related  entities,
The auction should be announced to the public by issue of advertisements  in at least two newspapers, one in vernacular language and another in national  daily newspaper,
As a policy, the NBFCs themselves should not participate in the auctions  held,
Gold pledged will be auctioned only through auctioneers approved by the  Board,
The policy shall also cover systems and procedures to be put in place  for dealing with fraud  including separation of duties of mobilization, execution and approval.
(ii)
The loan agreement shall also  disclose details regarding auction procedure.
Appendix
List of Circulars
Sr.No.
Circular No.
Date
1
DNBS (PD) CC No.80/03.10.042/2005-06
September 28, 2006
2
DNBS.PD/CC.No.95/03.05.002/2006-07
May 24, 2007
3
DNBS.PD/CC.No.107/03.10.042/2007-08
October 10, 2007
4
DNBS (PD) C.C. No.133/03.10.001/2008-09
January 2, 2009
5
DNBS (PD) CC.No.139/03.10.001/2008-09
April 24, 2009
6
DNBS.CC.PD.No.266/03.10.01/2011-12
March 26, 2012
7
DNBS.CC.PD.No.320/03.10.01/2012-13
February 18, 2013
8
DNBS(PD).CC. No.  399/03.10.42 /2014-15
July 14, 2014
1
Inserted vide
DNBS.CC.PD.No.266/03.10.01/2011-12  dated March 26, 2012
2
Inserted vide
DNBS(PD).CC. No. 399/03.10.42 /2014-15 dated July 14, 2014
3
DNBS.CC.PD.No.320/03.10.01/2012-13 dated February  18, 2013
4
DNBS.PD/CC.No.95/03.05.002/2006-07 dated May  24, 2007
and
DNBS.(PD).C.C.No.133/03.10.001/2008-09dated January 2, 2009
5
DNBS(PD)CC.No.139/03.10.001/2008-09 dated April  24, 2009