(74 kb)
Master Circular – Scheme of Incentives and Penalties for bank branches based on performance in rendering customer service to the members of public
RBI/2014-15/86
DCM (CC) No. G- 5/03.39.01/2014-15
July  01, 2014
The Chairman & Managing Director / Chief  Executive Officers
All Banks
Madam  / Dear Sir,
Master Circular – Scheme  of Incentives and Penalties for bank branches based on performance in rendering  customer service to the members of public
Please  refer to the
Master Circular DCM (CC) No. G-3/03.39.01/2013-14 dated July 01,  2013
containing the scheme of incentives and penalties for bank branches  including currency chests based on the performance in rendering customer  service to members of public.
2. A revised and updated version on the  subject is
annexed
for information and necessary action.
3. This Master Circular is available on  our website
www.rbi.org.in
.
Yours  faithfully,
(M.K.  Mall)
General  Manger (Officer-in-Charge)
Encl  : As above
Annex
Master Circular on the Scheme of Incentives and Penalties  for bank branches including currency chests based on performance in rendering  customer service to members of public.
1. The Scheme of Incentives  and Penalties for bank branches including currency chests has been introduced in order to ensure that all bank  branches provide better customer service to members of public with regard to  exchange of notes and coins.
2. Incentives
a) As  per the Scheme banks  are eligible for the following financial incentives for providing facilities  for exchange of notes and coins:
Sr. No.
Nature of    Service
Particulars    of Incentives
i)
Opening of    and maintaining currency chests at centers having population of less than 1    lakh in under banked States.
a. Capital Cost:
Reimbursement of 50% of    capital expenditure subject to a ceiling of Rs.50 lakh per currency    chest. In the North Eastern region    upto 100% of capital expenditure is eligible for reimbursement subject to the    ceiling of Rs.50 lakh.
b. Revenue cost:
Reimbursement of 50% of    revenue expenditure for the first 3 years. In the North Eastern region 50% of    revenue expenditure will be reimbursed for the first 5 years.
ii)
Exchange of    soiled notes/ adjudication of mutilated banknotes over the counter at bank branches
a.
Exchange  of soiled notes
–
`
2 per packet for exchange of soiled notes up to
`
50/-.
b.
Adjudication  of mutilated notes
–
`
2.00  per piece.
iii)
Distribution    of coins over counter
i.
`
25/- per bag for distribution of    coins over the counter.
ii. The incentives would be paid on the    basis of net withdrawal from currency chest, without waiting for claims from    banks.
iii. Banks may put in place a system of    checks and balances to ensure that coins are distributed to retail customers    in small lots and not to bulk.
iv. The distribution of coins shall be    verified by RBI Regional Offices through inspection of currency chest / incognito    visits to branches etc.
(iv)
Establishment of Coin Vending Machines
The existing level of incentives of
a) Capital cost reimbursement of 50% of capital    expenditure in case of Urban / Metro centres and reimbursement of 75% of    capital expenditure in case of rural and semi urban centres.
b) reimbursement of revenue cost at Rs.25/- per bag as applicable to    commercial banks maintaining currency chests would now be applicable to all    scheduled commercial banks including urban co-op. banks and RRBs (irrespective    of whether they maintain currency chest or not)
(v)
Installation of Machines which extend cash related retail services to    the public like –
i. Coin Pouch    Vending Machines;
ii. Note Packet    Vending Machines;
iii. Cash    Acceptors;
iv. Cash    Recyclers;
v. Desktop    banknote authenticating machines;
vi. ATMs    dispensing lower denomination notes.
50%    of the cost of the machines (including installation) in urban / metropolitan    areas and 75% in semi-urban and rural areas.
(vi)
Installation of Note Sorting Machines (NSMs)
Applicable    to RRBs, UCBs, all licensed State Co-operative Banks and District Central Co-operative    Banks –
50%    of cost of the machines in urban / metropolitan areas and 75% in semi-urban    and rural areas.
b) (i) The incentives will be paid on the soiled notes  actually received in the Regional Office. Banks need not submit a separate  claim. Currency chest branch will have to pass on the incentive to the linked  branches for the soiled notes tendered by them on a pro-rata basis
(ii) Similarly, incentive will be paid in respect of  the adjudicated notes received along with the soiled note remittances. No  separate claim is required to be made.
(iii) The claims for incentives for installation  of Coin Vending machines (CVMs), Note Sorting Machines (NSMs) and the machines  which extend cash related retail services to the public, with Auditor's  certificate should be submitted to the respective Issue Office of RBI on  quarterly basis within 30 days through the Link Office of the bank concerned. It  may please be ensured that coins are supplied either directly or through  linkage scheme so that CVMs remain functional.
3. Penalties
a) Penalties to be  imposed on banks for deficiencies in exchange of notes and coins/remittances  sent to RBI/operations of currency chests etc. are as follows:
Sr.No.
Nature of    Irregularity
Penalty
i.
Shortages in    soiled note remittances and currency chest balances
For notes in    denomination upto
`
.50
`
.50/- per piece in addition to the loss
For notes in    denomination of
`
.100 & above
Equal to the    value of the denomination per piece in addition to the loss.
Shortages of    100 pieces and above per remittance shall be debited immediately. Penalty may be levied on reaching a limit of 100 pieces in a cumulative    manner.
ii.
Counterfeit    notes detected in soiled note remittances and currency chest balances.
Penalty on    account of detection of counterfeit notes by RBI from soiled note remittance    of banks and in currency chest balances will henceforth be three times the    notional value of counterfeit notes.
In case it    is found during RBI Inspection, Snap Inspection etc. that a bank branch or    currency chest has detected counterfeit notes but not reported the same to    RBI or Police, strict regulatory measures against the bank including    stringent disciplinary action and /or imposition of monetary penalty, will be    taken by RBI.
Penalty will    be levied immediately for any counterfeit note detected.
iii.
Mutilated    notes detected in soiled note remittances and currency chest balances
`
50/- per piece irrespective of the denomination
Mutilated    notes of 100 pieces and above per remittance shall be debited immediately.    Penalty may be levied on reaching a limit of 100 pieces in a cumulative    manner.
iv.
Non-compliance    with operational guidelines by currency chests detected by RBI officials
a)    Non-functioning of CCTV
b) Branch    cash/documents kept in strong room
c)    Non-utilization of NSMs for sorting of notes (NSMs not used for sorting of    high denomination notes received over the counter or not used for sorting    notes remitted to chest/RBI)
Penalty of
`
5000 for each irregularity.
Penalty will    be enhanced to
`
.10,000 in case of repetition.
Penalty will    be levied immediately.
v.
Violation of    any term of agreement with RBI (for opening and maintaining currency chests)    or deficiency in service in providing exchange facilities, as detected by RBI    officials e.g..
a) Non-issue    of coins over the counter to any member of public despite having stock.
b) Refusal    by any bank branch to exchange soiled notes / refusal by any currency chest    branch to adjudicate mutilated notes tendered by any member of public
c) Non    conduct of surprise verification of chest balances, at least at bimonthly    intervals, by officials unconnected with the custody thereof and by the    officials from the Controlling Office once in six months.
d) Denial of    facilities/services to linked branches of other banks.
e) Non    acceptance of lower denomination notes (i.e. denomination of
`
50 and below) tendered by members of public and linked bank branches.
f) Detection    of mutilated /counterfeit notes in re-issuable packets prepared by the    currency chest branches.
`
10,000 for any violation of agreement or deficiency of service.
`
5 lakh in case there are more than 5 instances of violation of    agreement/deficiency in service by the branch. The levy of such penalty will    be placed in public domain.
Penalty will    be levied immediately.
b) The  Competent Authority to
decide the nature of irregularity
will be the  Officer-in-Charge of the Issue Department of the Regional Office under whose  jurisdiction the defaulting currency chest/bank branch is located.
c) Appeal  against the decision of the Competent Authority may be made by the Controlling  Office of the currency chest/branch to the Regional Director of the Regional  Office concerned,
within one month from the date of debit
, who may  decide whether the same can be accepted/ rejected.
d) Appeals for waiver of penalty made on grounds  such as staff being new/untrained, lack of awareness of staff, corrective  action having been taken/will be taken, etc. will not be considered.