(236 kb)
Master Circular on Credit Card, Debit Card and Rupee Denominated Cobranded Prepaid Card operations of banks
RBI/2014-15/58
DBOD.No.FSD.BC.02/24.01.009/2014-15
July 1, 2014
Ashadha 10, 1936 (Saka)
All Scheduled  Commercial Banks
(Excluding RRBs)
Dear Sir/Madam
Master Circular on Credit Card, Debit Card and Rupee Denominated Cobranded  Prepaid Card operations of banks
Please refer to
Master  Circular No. DBOD.No.FSD.BC.4/24.01.011/2013-14 dated July1, 2013
consolidating the instructions/guidelines issued on credit card operations of banks and  NBFCs and debit cards/prepaid card operations of banks.
2.  The instructions on credit card operations of banks and NBFCs as well as  guidelines on issuance of debit cards and co-branded pre-paid cards by banks  issued up to June 30, 2014 have  been consolidated in this
Master Circular
.
3.  It may be noted that the instructions on credit card operations of banks are  applicable, mutatis-mutandis, to NBFCs issuing credit cards.
4. The Master  Circular has been placed on the RBI website (
www.rbi.org.in
). All the credit, debit and pre-paid card issuing banks and  credit card issuing NBFCs should adhere to  these guidelines strictly.
Yours faithfully
(Lily Vadera)
Chief General Manager
Encl:  As Above
Table of Contents
Paragraph No
Particulars
A
Purpose
B
Classification
C
Previous    guidelines consolidated
D
Scope of    application
I
Credit Card Operations of    Banks
1
Introduction
2
Issue of    cards
3
Interest    rates and other charges
4
Wrongful    billing
5
Use of DSAs/DMAs    and other agents
6
Protection    of customer rights
7
Redressal    of grievances
8
Internal    control and monitoring systems
9
Fraud    control
10
Right to    impose penalty
II
Issue of    Debit Cards by banks
III
Issue of    Rupee Denominated Prepaid Cards by banks
Annex –    Most Important Terms and Conditions
Appendix    – List of circulars consolidated
Master Circular on Credit Card, Debit Card and
Rupee Denominated Co-branded Prepaid Card  operations of banks
A.
Purpose
: To provide a framework of rules/regulations/standards/practices to the  credit, debit, prepaid card issuing banks and to the credit card issuing NBFCs to  ensure that the same are in alignment with the best customer practices. Banks  should adopt adequate safeguards and implement the following guidelines in order to ensure  that their card operations  are run on sound, prudent and customer friendly manner.
B.
Classification:
A statutory guideline issued by the RBI.
C.
Previous guidelines consolidated:
This Master  Circular consolidates the instructions contained in the circulars listed in the  Appendix.
D.
Scope of Application:
To all Scheduled Commercial Banks (excluding RRBs) that engage in credit,  debit, prepaid card business directly or through their subsidiaries or affiliated  companies controlled by them  and to all NBFCs that engage in credit card business.
Structure
I. Credit Card  Operations of banks
1. Introduction
1.1 Background
1.2 Basic features of  credit cards
1.3 Types of  credit cards
1.4 Fair Practices Code
2. Issue of cards
3. Interest rates  and other charges
4. Wrongful  billing
5. Use of DSAs/  DMAs and other agents
6. Protection of customers’ rights
6.1 Right to privacy
6.2 Customer confidentiality
6.3 Fair practices in debt collection
7. Redressal of  Grievances
8. Internal  control and monitoring systems
9. Fraud Control
10. Right to  impose penalty
II. Issue of Debit Cards by banks
1 Introduction
2 Board  approved policy
3 Types  of debit cards
4 Offline  debit cards
5 Compliance  with KYC norms/AML standards/CFT obligations of banks under PMLA, 2002
6 Payment  of interest on balances
7 Terms  and conditions for issue of cards to customers
8 Cash  withdrawals
9 Security  and other aspects
10 Compliance  with DPSS instructions
11 Issue  of International Debit Card
12 Review  of operations
13 Reporting  requirements
14 Redressal  of grievances
15 Co-branding  arrangement
16. Unsolicited Commercial Communication
III. Issue of Rupee Denominated Co-Branded Prepaid Cards
1 Introduction
2 Board  approved policy
3 Due  diligence
4 Outsourcing  of activities
5 Role  of non-bank entity
6 Compliance with KYC norms/AML standards/CFT obligations of  banks under PMLA, 2002
7 Confidentiality of customer information
8 Payment  of interest
9 Compliance with DPSS guidelines on issue and operation of  prepaid instruments in India
10. Unsolicited Commercial Communication
Annex
- Most Important  Terms and Conditions
Appendix
– List of circulars consolidated
I.
Credit Card  Operations of Banks
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
This  circular is aimed at providing general guidance to banks/NBFCs on their credit  card operations, and the systems and controls expected of them in managing their credit card  business. It also sets out the best practices that they should aim to achieve.
Experience  has shown that the quality of banks’ credit card portfolios mirrors the economic  environment in which they operate. Very often, there is a strong correlation  between an economic downturn and deterioration in the quality of such portfolios. The  deterioration may become even more serious if banks have relaxed their credit  underwriting criteria and risk management standards as a result of intense competition in the  market. It is therefore important for banks to maintain prudent policies and  practices for managing the risks of their credit card business which are relevant to the market environment  that they operate in.
Banks in India can  undertake credit card business either departmentally or through a subsidiary company set up for the purpose. They can  also undertake domestic credit card  business by entering into tie-up arrangement with one of the banks already  having arrangements for issue of credit cards.
Prior  approval of the Reserve Bank is not necessary for banks desirous of undertaking  credit  card business either independently or in tie-up arrangement with other card issuing banks.  Banks can do so with the approval of their Boards. However, only banks with networth of
`
100 crore and above should undertake credit card  business. Banks desirous of setting up separate subsidiaries for  undertaking credit card business would, however, require prior approval of the Reserve Bank.  Banks should adopt adequate safeguards and implement the guidelines enunciated  in this circular in order to ensure that their credit card operations are run in a sound,  prudent and customer friendly manner.
It is  quite common for banks to partner with business corporations or non-profit making  organisations (e.g. charitable or professional bodies) to issue co-branded cards. However  they need to undertake due diligence on the non-bank entity to protect themselves against  the reputation risk to which they are exposed to in such an arrangement.  NBFCs, which desire to enter into a co-branding arrangement for issue of credit cards  with banks, may be guided by the instructions contained in
circular  No. DNBS (PD) CC No.83/03.10.27/2006-07 dated  December 04, 2006
.
Banks  may also issue corporate credit cards to the employees of their corporate customers.
1.4
Fair Practices Code
Each  bank must have a well documented policy and a Fair Practices Code for credit card operations.  The Banking Codes and Standards of India (BCSBI) has released a “Code of Bank’s  Commitment to Customers”(Code) in July 2006 as also a Guidance Note in December  2006, which have been adopted by most of the banks with the approval of their Boards. Such of the  banks which have subscribed to the BCSBI Code may  incorporate the principles contained in BCSBI Code for evolving their Fair Practices Code for credit card operations, in lieu  of IBA Fair Practices Code for credit card  operations. The banks’ Fair Practices Code, should at a minimum, incorporate  the relevant guidelines contained in  this Master Circular. Banks/NBFCs should also widely disseminate the  contents of this Master Circular, including through their websites.
2
Issue of cards
2.1 Banks/NBFCs should ensure prudence while  issuing credit cards and independently assess  the credit risk while issuing cards to persons, especially to students and  others with no independent financial means.  Add-on cards i.e. those that are subsidiary to the principal card, may be issued with the clear  understanding that the liability will be that of the principal  cardholder.
2.2 In terms of the instructions contained in  the
circular  DBOD.No.Leg.BC.65/09.07.005/2006-07 dated March 6, 2007
, banks have been advised that in  case of all categories of loans irrespective of any threshold limits, including credit  card applications, banks should convey in writing the main reason/reasons which in the opinion of  the bank have led to the rejection of the loan applications. It is reiterated that banks should convey in writing the  main reason/reasons which have led to the rejection of the credit card  applications.
2.3 As holding several credit cards enhances  the total credit available to any consumer, banks/NBFCs should assess the credit limit for a credit  card customer having regard to the limits  enjoyed by the cardholder from other banks on the basis of self- declaration/ credit  information obtained from a CIC.
2.4 The card issuing  banks/NBFCs would be solely responsible for fulfillment of all KYC requirements, even where DSAs / DMAs or other  agents solicit business on their behalf.
2.5 While issuing cards, the terms and conditions for issue and  usage of a credit card should be mentioned  in clear and simple language (preferably in English, Hindi and the local language) comprehensible to a card user. The  Most Important Terms and Conditions (MITCs) termed as standard set of  conditions, as given in the
Annex
,  should be highlighted and advertised/ sent  separately to the prospective customer/ customers at all the stages i.e. during marketing, at the  time of application, at the acceptance stage (welcome kit) and in  important subsequent communications.
3
Interest  rates and other charges
3.1 Credit card dues are in the nature of  non-priority sector personal loans and as such, upto June 30, 2010, banks were  free to determine the rate of interest on credit card dues without  reference to their BPLR and regardless of the size in terms of the Directives on Interest rates  on advances. However, with the introduction of Base Rate system with effect  from July 1, 2010, all categories of loans,  except certain specified exemptions, should be priced only with reference to  the Base Rate.
3.2 Banks are advised to be guided by the instructions  on interest rate on advances,  as amended from time to time, while determining the interest rate on credit card  dues. Banks have also been advised that they should prescribe a ceiling rate of interest,  including processing and other charges, in respect of small value personal loans and loans similar in nature. The  above instructions are applicable to  credit card dues also. In case, banks/ NBFCs charge interest rates which vary based on the payment/  default history of the cardholder, there should be transparency in  levying of such differential interest rates. In other words, the fact that higher interest rates are being charged  to the cardholder on account of his payment  / default history should be made known to the cardholder. For this purpose, the  banks should publicise through their website and other means, the interest  rates charged to various categories of  customers. Banks/NBFCs should upfront indicate to the credit card  holder, the methodology of calculation of finance charges with illustrative examples, particularly in situations where a part  of the amount outstanding is only paid by the customer.
3.3 Further, the banks/NBFCs have to adhere to  the following guidelines relating to interest rates and other charges on credit cards:
Card issuers  should ensure that there is no delay in dispatching bills and the customer has  sufficient number of days (at least one fortnight) for making payment before the  interest starts getting charged. In order to obviate frequent complaints of  delayed billing, the credit card issuing bank/NBFC may consider providing bills  and statements  of accounts online, with suitable security measures. Banks/ NBFCs could also consider putting in place a  mechanism to ensure that the customer’s acknowledgement is obtained for receipt  of the monthly statement.
Card issuers should quote Annualized  Percentage Rates (APR) on card products (separately  for retail purchase and for cash advance, if different). The method of calculation of APR should be given with a couple  of examples for better comprehension.  The APR charged and the annual fee should be shown with equal prominence. The late payment charges, including the  method of calculation of such charges  and the number of days, should be prominently indicated. The manner in which the outstanding unpaid amount will be included  for calculation of interest should also  be specifically shown with prominence in all monthly statements. Even where the  minimum amount indicated to keep the  card valid has been paid, it should be indicated in bold letters that the interest will be charged on the amount due  after the due date of payment. These  aspects may be shown in the Welcome Kit in addition to being shown in the monthly statement.
A legend/notice to the effect that “
Making only the minimum payment every month would result in the repayment  stretching over years with consequent interest payment on your  outstanding balance
" should be prominently displayed in all the monthly  statements so as to caution the customers about the pitfalls in paying only the minimum  amount due.
Banks/NBFCs should  step up their efforts on educating the cardholders of the implications of  paying only ‘the minimum amount due’. The “Most Important Terms and Conditions”  should specifically explain that the ‘free credit period’ is lost if any  balance of the previous month’s  bill is outstanding. For this purpose, banks/ NBFCs could work out illustrative examples and include the same in  the Welcome Kit sent to the cardholders as also place it on their  website.
The banks /NBFCs  should not levy any charge that was not explicitly indicated to the credit card  holder at the time of issue of the card and without getting his / her consent. However, this  would not be applicable to charges like service taxes, etc. which may subsequently be levied by the  Government or any other statutory authority.
The terms and conditions for payment  of credit card dues, including the minimum payment  due, should be stipulated so as to ensure that there is no negative amortization.
Changes in  charges (other than interest) may be made only with prospective effect giving notice of  at least one month. If a credit card holder desires to surrender his credit  card on account of any change in credit card charges to his disadvantage, he  may be permitted to do so without the bank levying any extra charge for such  closure. Any request for closure of a credit card has to be honoured immediately by  the credit card issuer,  subject to full settlement of dues by the cardholder.
There should be transparency (without any hidden charges)  in issuing credit cards free  of charge during the first year.
4.
Wrongful billing
The  card issuing bank/NBFC should ensure that wrong bills are not raised and issued  to  customers. In case, a customer protests any bill, the bank/ NBFC should provide  explanation  and, if necessary, documentary evidence may also be provided to the customer within a maximum period of sixty days with a  spirit to amicably redress the grievances.
5.
Use of Direct Sales Agent (DSAs) /  Direct Marketing Agents (DMAs) and other agents
5.1. When  banks /NBFCs outsource the various credit card operations, they have to be extremely careful that the appointment  of such service providers does not compromise with  the quality of the customer service and the banks'/NBFCs' ability to manage  credit, liquidity and operational  risks. In the choice of the service provider, the banks/NBFCs have to be guided by the need to ensure  confidentiality of the customer’s records, respect customer privacy, and  adhere to fair practices in debt collection.
5.2 In  terms of the BCSBI’s Code of Bank’s Commitment to Customers, banks which have subscribed to  the Code are required to prescribe a Code of Conduct for their DSAs whose  services are engaged by banks for marketing their products/services. Banks should ensure  that the DSAs engaged by them for marketing their  credit card products scrupulously adhere to the Code of Conduct for Credit Card operations of the banks/NBFCs which should be displayed on the website of individual bank/NBFC and  be available easily to any credit card holder.
5.3 The  bank/NBFC should have a system of random checks and mystery shopping to ensure that their agents have been  properly briefed and trained in order to handle with care and caution their responsibilities, particularly in the aspects included  in these guidelines like soliciting  customers, hours for calling, privacy of customer information, conveying  the correct terms and conditions of the product on offer, etc.
6.
Protection of  Customer’s Rights
Customer’s rights in relation to credit card operations primarily relate  to personal privacy, clarity relating to rights and obligations, preservation of  customer records, maintaining confidentiality of customer information and  fair practices in debt collection. The card issuing bank/NBFC would be responsible as the  principal for all acts of omission  or commission of their agents (DSAs / DMAs and recovery agents).
6.1
Right to privacy
Unsolicited cards should not be  issued. In case, an unsolicited card is issued and activated without the written consent of the recipient and the latter is  billed for the same, the card  issuing bank shall not only reverse the charges forthwith, but also pay a penalty without demur to the recipient amounting  to twice the value of the charges reversed.
In addition, the person in whose name the card  is issued can also approach the Banking Ombudsman who would determine the amount of  compensation payable by the bank to the recipient of the unsolicited card as per  the provisions of the Banking Ombudsman Scheme 2006, i.e., for loss of complainant’s  time, expenses incurred, harassment  and mental anguish suffered by him.
There have been  instances where unsolicited cards issued have been misused before reaching  the person in whose name these have been issued. It is clarified that any loss arising  out of misuse of such unsolicited cards will be the responsibility of the card issuing  bank/NBFC only and the person in whose name the card has been issued cannot be held responsible for the  same.
The consent for  the cards issued or the other products offered along with the card has to be  explicit and should not be implied. In other words, the written consent of the applicant would be required before  issuing a credit card.
Unsolicited loans  or other credit facilities should not be offered to the credit card customers. In  case an unsolicited credit facility is extended without the consent of the recipient and the latter objects to  the same, the credit sanctioning bank/NBFC shall not only withdraw the credit limit, but also be liable to pay such penalty  as may be considered appropriate.
The card issuing  bank/NBFC should not unilaterally upgrade credit cards and enhance credit  limits. Prior consent of the borrower should invariably be taken whenever there are any change/s in  terms and conditions.
Banks may ensure that they engage  telemarketers who comply with directions/regulations on the subject issued by  the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) from time to time while  adhering to guidelines issued on “Unsolicited Commercial Communications  – National Customer Preference Register(NCPR)” as contained in the
circular  DBOD.No.FSD.BC.30/24.01.001/2013-14 dated July 15, 2013
.
6.2
Customer  confidentiality
The card issuing  bank/NBFC should not reveal any information relating to customers obtained at the  time of opening the account or issuing the credit card to any other person or  organization without obtaining their specific consent, as regards the purpose/s for which  the information will be used and the organizations with whom the information will  be shared. Instances have come to light where banks, as part of the MITCs, obtain  the consent of the customer for sharing the information furnished by him while applying for the credit card,  with other agencies. Banks should give the customer the option to decide as to whether he is agreeable for the bank sharing  with other agencies the information furnished by him at the time of  applying for credit card. The application form for credit card may be suitably  modified to explicitly provide for the same.  Further, in case where the customers gives his consent for the bank sharing  the information with other agencies, banks should explicitly state and explain clearly to the customer the full meaning/  implications of the disclosure clause. Banks/NBFCs  should satisfy themselves, based on specific legal advice, that the information being sought from them is not of such  nature as will violate the provisions of  the laws relating to secrecy in the transactions. Banks/NBFCs would be solely responsible  for the correctness or otherwise of the data provided for the purpose.
For providing  information relating to credit history / repayment record of the card holder to a Credit  Information Company (that has obtained Certificate of Registration from RBI),  the bank/NBFC  may explicitly bring to the notice of the customer that such information is being provided in terms of the Credit  Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005.
Before reporting default  status of a credit card holder to a Credit Information Company which has obtained  Certificate of Registration from RBI and of which the bank / NBFC is a member,  banks/NBFCs should ensure that they adhere to a procedure, duly approved by their Board,  including issuing of sufficient notice to such card holder about the intention to report him/  her as defaulter to the Credit Information Company. The procedure should also cover  the notice period for such reporting as also the period within which such report  will be withdrawn in the event the customer settles his dues after having been reported as defaulter. Banks  /NBFCs should be particularly careful in the case of cards where there are pending disputes. The disclosure/ release of  information, particularly about the  default, should be made only after the dispute is settled as far as possible. In all cases, a well laid down procedure  should be transparently followed. These procedures should also be  transparently made known as part of MITCs.
The disclosure to  the DSAs / recovery agents should also be limited to the extent that will enable  them to discharge their duties. Personal information provided by the card holder but  not required for recovery purposes should not be released by the card issuing bank/NBFC.  The card issuing bank /NBFCs should ensure that the DSAs / DMAs do not  transfer or misuse any customer information during marketing of credit card products.
6.3
Fair  Practices in debt collection
In the matter of  recovery of dues, banks should ensure that they, as also their agents, adhere to  the extant instructions on Fair Practice Code for lenders (
circular  DBOD.Leg.No.BC.104/09.07.007/2002-03 dated May 5, 2003
) as also BCSBI’s  Code of  Bank’s Commitment to Customers(those banks which have subscribed to the BCSBI Code). In case  banks have their own code for collection of dues, they should, at the minimum, incorporate all the terms of  BCSBI’s Code referred above.
In particular, in  regard to appointment of third party agencies for debt collection, it is essential that  such agents refrain from action that could damage the integrity and reputation of the  bank/NBFC and that they observe strict customer confidentiality. All letters issued  by recovery agents must contain the name and address of a responsible senior officer of the card issuing  bank whom the customer can contact at his location.
Banks /NBFCs / their agents should not  resort to intimidation or harassment of any kind,  either verbal or physical, against any person in their debt collection efforts,  including acts intended to humiliate  publicly or intrude the privacy of the credit card holders’ family members, referees and friends,  making threatening and anonymous calls or making false and misleading  representations.
The banks should  also ensure to comply with the guidelines in respect of engagement of  recovery agents (
circular  No. DBOD. No. Leg. BC.75/09.07.005/2007-08 dated  April 24, 2008
) issued by RBI. These guidelines inter-alia cover  aspects relating to i) engagement of Recovery Agents including verification  of antecedents of their employees by agents, (ii) incentives to recovery agents –  banks to ensure that contracts with the recovery agents do not induce adoption  of uncivilized, unlawful and questionable  behaviour for recovery process, (iii) methods followed by recovery agents, (iv) training to recovery agents, (v) taking  possession of property mortgaged /hypothecated to banks, (vi) use of  forum of Lok Adalats, (vii) complaints against the bank/recovery agents, and  (viii) periodical review of the recovery agents’ mechanism.
6.4
Insurance  cover to cardholders
In  cases where the banks are offering any insurance cover to their credit card  holders, in tie-up with insurance companies, the banks may consider obtaining in  writing from the credit card holders the details of nominee/s for the insurance cover  in respect of accidental death and disablement benefits. Banks may ensure that the  relevant nomination details are recorded by the Insurance Company. Banks may  also consider issuing a letter to the credit card holder indicating the details  regarding the name, address and telephone number of the Insurance Company  which will handle the claims relating  to the insurance cover.
7
Redressal of Grievances
7.1 Generally, a time limit of 60 (sixty)  days may be given to the customers for preferring their complaints / grievances.
7.2 The card issuing bank /NBFC should  constitute Grievance Redressal machinery within the bank/NBFC and give wide publicity about it  through electronic and print media.  The name and contact number of designated grievance redressal officer of the bank /NBFC should be mentioned on the credit card  bills. The designated officer should ensure  that genuine grievances of credit card subscribers are redressed promptly without  involving delay.
7.3 Banks/NBFCs  should ensure that their call centre staff is trained adequately to competently handle all customer  complaints.
7.4 Banks/NBFCs should also have a mechanism  to escalate automatically unresolved complaints  from a call center to higher authorities and the details of such mechanism  should be put in public domain through their website.
7.5 The grievance redressal procedure of the  bank/NBFC and the time frame fixed for responding to the complaints should be placed on the  bank's website. The name, designation, address and contact number of important  executives as well as the Grievance Redressal Officer of the bank/NBFC may be  displayed on the website. There should be a system of acknowledging customers'  complaints for follow up, such as  complaint number / docket number, even if the complaints are received on phone.
7.6 If a complainant does not get  satisfactory response from the bank/NBFC which is a subsidiary of a  bank within a maximum period of thirty (30) days from the date of his lodging the  complaint, he will have the option to approach the Office of the concerned Banking Ombudsman  for redressal of his grievance/s. The bank/NBFC, which is a subsidiary of a bank,  shall be liable to compensate the complainant for the loss of his time, expenses,  financial loss as well as for the harassment and mental anguish suffered by him for  the fault of the bank and where the grievance has not been redressed in time.
8
Internal control and monitoring  systems
With a view to ensuring  that the quality of customer service is ensured on an on-going basis in  banks/NBFCs, the Standing Committee on Customer Service in each bank/NBFC  should review the credit card operations including reports of defaulters  to a Credit Information Company which has obtained Certificate of Registration  from RBI and of which the bank / NBFC is a member and credit card related  complaints on a monthly basis and take measures to improve the services and  ensure the orderly growth in the credit card operations. Banks should put up  detailed quarterly analysis of credit card related complaints to their Top  Management. Card issuing banks should have in place a suitable monitoring  mechanism to randomly check the genuineness of merchant transactions. Banks should prepare and place before their  Boards/Management Committee a comprehensive Review Report on credit card  business on half-yearly basis as at the end of September and March of each  accounting year, which should cover essential data on credit card business,  such as category and number of cards issued and outstanding, number of active  cards, average turnover per card, number of establishments covered, average  time taken for recovery of dues from the card holders, debts classified as NPAs  and provisions held there-against or amounts written off, details of frauds on  credit cards, steps taken to recover the dues, profitability analysis of the  business, etc.
9
Fraud Control
9.1 Banks/NBFCs should set up internal control  systems to combat frauds and actively participate in fraud prevention committees/ task forces  which formulate laws to prevent frauds  and take proactive fraud control and enforcement measures.
9.2 With a view to reducing the instances of  misuse of lost/stolen cards, it is recommended to banks/NBFCs that they may consider issuing  (i) cards with photographs of the cardholder (ii) cards with PIN and (iii) signature laminated  cards or any other  advanced methods that may evolve from time to time.
9.3 In  terms of instructions issued by Department of Payment and Settlement Systems,  Reserve Bank of India  on security issues and risk mitigation measures, as amended from time to time, banks  have been advised to put in place a system of providing for additional  authentication/ validation based on information not visible on the cards. The  same has been extended to Mail order Transactions Order (MOTO) transactions,  which are also a subset of the card-not present transactions. Further, banks have been advised to take steps to put in place a system  of online alerts for all types of transactions irrespective of the amount,  involving the usage of cards at various channels. Banks have also been advised  to put in place various security and risk mitigation measures for electronic  payment transactions, in terms of guidelines issued by DPSS from time to time.
9.4 Banks are advised to block a lost card  immediately on being informed by the customer and formalities, if any, including lodging of  FIR can follow within a reasonable period.
9.5 Banks may consider introducing, at the  option of the customers, an insurance cover to take care of the liabilities  arising out of lost cards. In other words, only those cardholders who  are ready to bear the cost of the premium should be provided an appropriate insurance cover in respect  of lost cards.
10
Right to impose penalty
Reserve Bank of India  reserves the right to impose any penalty on a bank/NBFC under the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act,  1949/the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, respectively for violation of  any of these guidelines.
II
Issue of Debit Cards by  banks
1 Introduction
Debit  cards were issued by banks in terms of the guidelines contained in circular  DBOD.No.FSC.BC.123/24.01.019/99-2000 dated November 12, 1999, and subsequent  amendments and mail box clarifications. After enactment of the Payment and  Settlement Systems Act, 2007(PSSA), Department of Payment and Settlement Systems  (DPSS) of the Reserve Bank of India, has also issued instructions on some  aspects of debit cards such as security and risk mitigation, transfer of funds  between domestic debit, prepaid and credit cards, and merchant discount rates. In view of the above, and in supersession of  previous instructions, comprehensive guidelines on debit cards were issued.
In  terms of the revised guidelines, banks may ensure to issue debit cards,  including co-branded debit cards, without seeking prior approval of the Reserve  Bank, subject to the following:
2 Board approved policy
Banks may  formulate a comprehensive debit cards issuance policy including policy on  co-branded debit cards with the approval of their Boards and issue debit cards  to their customers in accordance with this policy. Debit cards should be issued to customers  having Saving Bank/Current Accounts but not to cash credit/ loan account  holders
.
3 Types of debit  cards
Banks may issue only online debit cards  including co-branded debit cards where there is an immediate debit to the  customers’ account, and where straight through processing is involved.
4 Offline debit cards
Banks are not permitted to issue offline-debit  cards. Banks which have been issuing offline debit  cards were advised to conduct a review of their offline debit card operations  and discontinue operations of such cards within a period of six months from  December 12, 2012. Banks may, however, ensure that customers are duly informed  regarding switching over to online debit cards. The review and confirmation  regarding discontinuation of issue and  operations of offline debit cards should be sent to the Chief General Manager,  Department of Banking Operations and Development, Central Office Building,  Shahid Bhagat Singh Marg, Mumbai 400001.  However,  till such time as offline cards are phased out, the outstanding balances  / unspent balances stored on the cards shall be subject to computation of  reserve requirements.
5 Compliance  with Know Your  Customer (KYC) Norms / Anti-Money Laundering (AML) Standards / Combating of  Financing of Terrorism (CFT) / Obligation of banks under PMLA, 2002
The instructions/ guidelines on KYC/AML/ CFT applicable to banks, issued  by RBI from time to time, may be adhered to in respect of  all cards issued, including co-branded debit cards.
6 Payment of interest on balances
Payment of interest should be in accordance with interest rate  directives as issued from time to time.
7 Terms and conditions for issue of  cards to customers
i) No bank shall dispatch a card to a customer  unsolicited, except in the case where the card is a replacement for a card  already held by the customer.
ii) The  relationship between the bank and the card holder shall be contractual.
iii) Each bank  shall make available to the cardholders in writing, a set of contractual terms and conditions governing  the issue and use of such a card. These terms shall maintain a fair balance  between the interests of the parties concerned.
iv) The terms  shall be expressed clearly.
v) The terms  shall specify the basis of any charges, but not necessarily the amount of  charges at any point of time.
vi) The terms  shall specify the period within which the cardholder’s account would normally  be debited.
vii) The terms may be altered by the bank, but  sufficient notice of the change shall be given to the cardholder to enable him  to withdraw if he so chooses. A period shall be specified after which time the  cardholder would be deemed to have accepted the terms if he had not withdrawn  during the specified period.
viii) (a) The terms shall put the cardholder  under an obligation to take all appropriate steps to keep safe the card and the  means (such as PIN or code) which enable it to be used.
(b) The terms shall put the cardholder under  an obligation not to record the PIN or code, in any form that would be  intelligible or otherwise accessible to any third party if access is gained to  such a record, either honestly or dishonestly.
(c) The terms shall put the cardholder under  an obligation to notify the bank immediately after becoming aware:
-  of the loss or theft or copying of the card or the means which enable it to be  used;
- of the recording on the cardholder’s account  of any unauthorised transaction;
- of any error or other irregularity in the  maintaining of that account by the bank.
(d) The terms shall specify a contact point  to which such notification can be made. Such notification can be made at any  time of the day or night.
ix) The terms shall specify that the bank shall  exercise care when issuing PINs or codes and shall be under an obligation not  to disclose the cardholder’s PIN or code, except to the cardholders.
x) The terms shall specify that the bank shall  be responsible for direct losses incurred by a cardholder due to a system  malfunction directly within the bank’s control. However, the bank shall not be  held liable for any loss caused by a technical breakdown of the payment system  if the breakdown of the system was recognizable for the cardholder by a message  on the display of the device or otherwise known. The responsibility of the bank  for the non-execution or defective execution of the transaction is limited to  the principal sum and the loss of interest subject to the provisions of the law  governing the terms.
8 Cash withdrawals
No cash  transactions through the debit cards should be offered at the Point of Sale  under any facility without prior authorization of Reserve Bank of India under  Section 23 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949
9 Security and  other aspects
i) The bank shall ensure  full security of the debit card. The security of the debit card shall be the  responsibility of the bank and the losses incurred by any party on account of  breach of security or failure of the security mechanism shall be borne by the  bank.
ii) Banks shall keep for a  sufficient period of time, internal records to enable operations to be traced  and errors to be rectified (taking into account the law of limitation for the  time barred cases).
iii) The cardholder shall be provided with a  written record of the transaction after he has completed it, either immediately  in the form of receipt or within a reasonable period of time in another form  such as the customary bank statement.
iv) The cardholder shall  bear the loss sustained up to the time of notification to the bank of any loss,  theft or copying of the card but only up to a certain limit (of fixed amount or  a percentage of the transaction agreed upon in advance between the cardholder  and the bank), except where the cardholder acted fraudulently, knowingly or  with extreme negligence.
v) Each bank shall provide means whereby his  customers may at any time of the day or night notify the loss, theft or copying  of their payment devices.
vi) On receipt of  notification of the loss, theft or copying of the card, the bank shall take all  action open to it to stop any further use of the card.
vii) With a view to reducing the instances  of misuse of lost/stolen cards, banks may consider issuing cards with  photographs of the cardholder or any other advanced methods that may evolve  from time to time.
10 Compliance with DPSS instructions
The issue of debit cards  as a payment mechanism would also be subject to relevant guidelines on cash withdrawal,  issue of international debit card, security issues and risk mitigation measures, card-to-card fund transfers, merchant discount rates structure, failed ATM transactions, etc,  issued by the Department of Payment and Settlement Systems under the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007, as amended from  time to time.
11 Issue of  International Debit Card
Issue of international  debit cards will also be subject to directions issued under Foreign Exchange  Management Act, 1999, as amended from time to time.
12 Review of operations
The banks  should undertake review of their operations/issue of debit cards on half-yearly  basis. The review may include,  inter-alia, card usage analysis including cards not used for long durations due  to their inherent risks.
13 Reporting requirements
The report on the  operations of smart/debit cards issued by banks required to be submitted on a  half yearly basis to the Department of Payment and Settlement Systems (DPSS)  with a copy to the concerned Regional Office of Department of Banking  Supervision in whose jurisdiction the Head Office of the bank is situated, as prescribed in paragraph 14.1 of the  Master Circular on Para Banking Activities is discontinued with effect from  December 12, 2012.
14 Redressal of  grievances
Banks may ensure to put in place an effective  mechanism for redressal of customer complaints. The grievance redressal procedure of the bank and the  time frame fixed for responding to the complaints should be placed on the  bank's website. The name, designation, address and contact number of important  executives as well as the Grievance Redressal Officer of the bank may be displayed  on the website. There should be a system of acknowledging customers' complaints  for follow up, such as complaint number / docket number, even if the complaints  are received on phone. If a complainant does not get  satisfactory response from the bank within a maximum period of thirty (30) days  from the date of his lodging the complaint, he will have the option to approach  the Office of the concerned Banking Ombudsman for redressal of his grievance/s.  DPSS guidelines on timeframe for reconciliation of failed transactions at ATMs  as amended from time to time should be complied with in this regard.
15 Co-branding arrangement
Co-branded debit cards issued by banks will be subject to the following  terms and conditions, in addition to the above:
• Board approved policy
The co-branding arrangement should be as per the Board  approved policy of the bank. The policy may specifically address issues  pertaining to the various risks associated with such an arrangement including  reputation risk and put in place suitable risk mitigation measures.
• Due diligence
Banks should  carry out due diligence in respect of the non-banking entity with which they  intend to enter into tie-up for issue of such cards to protect themselves  against the reputation risk they are exposed to in such an arrangement. Banks may ensure that in  cases where the proposed co-branding partner is a financial entity, it has  obtained necessary approvals from its regulator for entering into the  co-branding agreement.
• Outsourcing       of activities
The card issuing  bank would be liable for all acts of the co-branding partner. The bank may  ensure adherence to the guidelines on “Managing Risks and Code of Conduct in  outsourcing of financial services by banks” as contained in the
circular  DBOD.No.BP.40/21.04.158/2006-07 dated November 3, 2006
, as amended from  time to time.
• Role of       non-bank entity
The role of  the non-bank entity under the tie-up arrangement should be limited to marketing/  distribution of the cards or providing access to the cardholder for the  goods/services that are offered.
• Confidentiality       of customer information
The card  issuing bank should not reveal any information relating to customers obtained  at the time of opening the account or issuing the card and the co-branding  non-banking entity should not be permitted to access any details of customer’s  accounts that may violate bank’s secrecy obligations.
Banks, which were granted  specific approvals for issue of co-branded debit cards in the past, were  advised to ensure that the co-branding arrangement is in conformity with the  instructions mentioned above. In case, the co-branding arrangement is between  two banks, the card issuing bank may ensure compliance with the above  conditions.
16 Unsolicited Commercial Communication
As stated in paragraph I 6.1(g), banks may ensure that they engage telemarketers  who comply with directions/ regulations issued by the Telecom Regulatory  Authority of India (TRAI) from time to time while adhering to  guidelines issued on “Unsolicited  Commercial Communications – National Customer Preference Register (NCPR)” as  contained in the
circular DBOD.No.FSD.BC.30/24.01.001/2013-14 dated July 15, 2013
.
III
Issuance  of rupee denominated co-branded pre-paid cards
1 Introduction
Banks were permitted to  issue smart cards subject to the instructions contained in our circulars  DBOD.No.FSC.BC.123/24.01.019/99-2000 dated November 12, 1999,
DBOD.  No.FSC.BC.133/ 24.01.019/2000-01 dated June 18, 2001
and
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.88/24.01.019/2001-02  dated April 11, 2002
. While foreign currency denominated pre-paid cards,  including co-branding arrangements, if any, can be issued subject to the  guidelines issued under Foreign Exchange Management  Act, 1999, as amended from time to time, issue of rupee denominated  pre-paid payment instruments is subject to the stipulations contained in the “Issuance and Operation of Pre-paid Payment  Instruments in India-Consolidated Revised Policy Guidelines “issued  under the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007, vide
circular  DPSS.CO.PD.No.2366/02.14.006/2013-14 dated May 13, 2014
.
Accordingly, in supersession of the earlier guidelines on issue of smart  cards, it was decided to grant general permission to banks to issue rupee  denominated co-branded pre-paid cards in India, subject to the following terms  and conditions:
2 Board  approved policy
The co-branding  arrangement should be as per the Board approved policy of the bank. The policy  may specifically address issues pertaining to the various risks associated with  such an arrangement including reputation risk and put in place suitable risk  mitigation measures.
3 Due diligence
Banks should carry out due diligence in respect of the non-banking  entity with which they intend to enter into tie-up for issue of such cards to  protect themselves against the reputation risk they are exposed to in such an  arrangement. In case of proposed tie up with a financial entity, they may  ensure that the entity has the approval of its regulator before entering into  such arrangement.
4 Outsourcing  of activities
The card issuing bank would be liable for all acts of the co-branding  partner. The bank may ensure adherence to the guidelines on “Managing Risks and  Code of Conduct in outsourcing of financial services by banks” as contained in  the
circular  DBOD.No.BP.40/21.04.158/2006-07 dated November 3, 2006
, as amended from  time to time.
5 Role  of non-bank entity
The role of the non-bank entity under the tie-up arrangement should be  limited to marketing/ distribution of the cards or providing access to the  cardholder for the goods/services that are offered.
6 Compliance  with Know Your  Customer (KYC) Norms / Anti-Money Laundering (AML) Standards / Combating of  Financing of Terrorism (CFT) / Obligation of banks under PMLA, 2002
The instructions/ guidelines on KYC/AML/ CFT applicable to banks, issued  by RBI from time to time, should be adhered to, in respect of  all cards issued under the co-branding arrangement.
7 Confidentiality  of customer information
The card issuing bank should not reveal any information relating to  customers obtained at the time of opening the account or issuing the card and  the co-branding non-banking entity should not be permitted to access any  details of customer’s accounts that may violate bank’s secrecy obligations.
8 Payment  of interest
No interest may be paid on the balances  transferred to pre-paid payment cards.
9 Compliance with DPSS Guidelines on  Issue and Operation of pre-paid instruments in India
The arrangement will be  subject to adherence/ compliance with instructions issued by DPSS from time to  time on issue and operation of pre-paid instruments, which includes pre-paid  cards, in India.
Banks, which were granted  specific approvals for issue of rupee denominated co-branded pre-paid cards in  the past, are advised to ensure that the co-branding arrangement is in  conformity with the instructions mentioned above. In case, the co-branding  arrangement is between two banks, the card issuing bank may ensure compliance  with the above conditions.
10 Unsolicited Commercial Communication
As stated in paragraph I 6.1(g), banks may ensure that they engage telemarketers  who comply with directions/ regulations issued by the Telecom Regulatory  Authority of India (TRAI) from time to time while adhering to guidelines issued on “Unsolicited  Commercial Communications – National Customer Preference Register (NCPR)” as  contained in the
circular  DBOD.No.FSD.BC.30/24.01.001/2013-14 dated July 15, 2013
.
ANNEX
1. Most Important Terms and  Conditions (MITCs)
(a) Fees and Charges
i) Joining fees for  primary card holder and for add-on card holder
ii) Annual membership  fees for primary and add-on card holder
iii) Cash advance fee
iv) Service charges  levied for certain transactions
v) Interest free (grace) period -
illustrated with examples
vi) Finance charges  for both revolving credit and cash advances
vii) Overdue interest  charges - to be given on monthly & annualised basis
viii) Charges in case of  default
(b) Drawal limits
i) Credit limit
ii) Available credit limit
iii) Cash withdrawal limit
(c) Billing
i) Billing statements—periodicity and mode of sending
ii) Minimum amount payable
iii) Method of payment
iv) Billing disputes resolution
v) Contact particulars of 24 hour call centers of card issuer
vi) Grievances redressal escalation—contact particulars of  officers to be contacted
vii) Complete postal address of card issuing bank
viii) Toll free number for customer care services
(d) Default and circumstances
i) Procedure including notice period for reporting a card  holder as defaulter
ii) Procedure for withdrawal of default report and the period  within which the default report  would be withdrawn after settlement of dues
iii) Recovery procedure in case of default
iv) Recovery of dues in case of death/ permanent  incapacitance of cardholder
v) Available insurance cover for card holder and date of  activation of policy
(e) Termination / revocation of card  membership
i)  Procedure for surrender of card by card holder - due notice
(f) Loss/theft/misuse of card
i) Procedure to be  followed in case of loss/ theft/ misuse of card-mode of intimation to card issuer
ii) Liability of card  holder in case of (i) above
(g) Disclosure
Type of information relating to card  holder to be disclosed with and without approval of card holder
2. Disclosure of MITCs - Items to be disclosed in stages:
i) During marketing        - Item no: a
ii) At application             - Item nos: all items from a to g
iii) Welcome Kit            - Item nos: all items from a  to g
iv) On billing                     - Item  nos: a, b and c,
v) On an ongoing basis, any change  of the terms and conditions
Note :
i) The font size of MITC should be  minimum Arial-12
ii) The normal terms and  conditions communicated by the card issuer to the card holder at different  stages will continue as hitherto.
APPENDIX
List of Circulars consolidated by the Master Circular
No.
Circular No.
Date
Subject
1.
DBOD.No.FSD.BC.30/24.01.001/2013-14
Jul    15, 2013
Unsolicited    Commercial Communications – National Customer Preference Register (NCPR)
2.
DPSS(CO)PD.No.1462/02.14.003/2012-13
February    28, 2013
Security    and risk mitigation measures for electronic payment transactions
3.
DBOD.No.FSD.BC.67/24.01.019/ 2012-13
December    12, 2012
Issuance    of rupee denominated co-branded pre-paid cards
4.
DBOD.No.FSD.BC.66/24.01.019/ 2012-13
December    12, 2012
Guidelines    for issue of debit cards by banks
5.
DPSS.PD.CO.No.223/02.14.003/2011-2012
August 04, 2011
Security Issues and Risk    Mitigation Measures related to Card Not Present  (CNP) Transactions
6.
DPSS.CO.PD.2224/02.14.003/ 2010-11
March    29, 2011
Security Issues and Risk Mitigation Measures - Online    Alerts to the Cardholder for Usage of Credit / Debit Cards.
7.
DPSS.CO.No.1503/02.14.003/ 2010-11
December    31, 2010
Security Issues and Risk Mitigation Measures related    to Card Not Present Transactions
8.
DBOD.FSD.BC.No.25/24.01.011/ 2010-11
July 9, 2010
Credit Card Operations of Banks
9.
DPSS.No.1501/02.14.003/ 2008-2009
February    18, 2009
Credit/ Debit Card Transactions – Security Issues and    Risk Mitigation Measures
10.
DBOD.No.FSD.BC.45/24.01.011/ 2008-09
September    17, 2008
Unsolicited Commercial Communications -
National Do Not Call (NDNC) Registry
11.
DBOD.FSD.BC.23/24.01.01/2008- 09
July    23, 2008
Credit Card    Operations of
Banks
12.
DBOD.No.Leg.BC.75/09.07.005/2007-08
April 24, 2008
Recovery Agents engaged by banks
13.
DBOD.FSD.BC.35/24.01.011/ 2007-08
October 19, 2007
Unsolicited Commercial Communications –National Do Not Call Registry
14.
DBOD.FSD.BC.19/24.01 .011/ 2007-08
July    3, 2007
Unsolicited Commercial         Communications –    National   Do    Not Call Registry
15.
DBOD.No.Dir.BC.93/13.03.00/ 2006-07
May 7, 2007
Complaints    about excessive interest charged by banks
16.
DBOD. No. Leg. BC.65/09.07.005/2006- 07
March 06, 2007
Guidelines on Fair Practices Code for Lenders
17.
DBOD. FSD. BC. No. 49/ 24.01.011/ 2005-06
November    21, 2005
Credit Card Operations by banks
18.
DBOD.Leg.BC.104/09.07.007/ 2002-03
May    5, 2003
Guidelines on Fair 
              Practice Codes for Lenders
19.
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.120/24.01.011/2000- 01
May    12, 2001
Credit Card Business of 
            Banks
20.
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.41/24.01.011/2000- 01
October    30, 2000
Issue of Credit/Debit Cards by banks
21.
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.50/24.01.011/98
June    2, 1998
Entry of banks into domestic credit card business
22.
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.152/24.01.01/97-98
December    9, 1997
Domestic credit card business of banks
23.
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.47/C.469-90/91
November    7, 1990
Entry of banks into domestic credit card business
24.
DBOD.No.BP(FSC).BC.144/C.469-89
June    30, 1989
Entry of banks into domestic credit card business