(466 kb)
Master Circular – Para-banking Activities
RBI/2014-15/57
DBOD.  No.FSD.BC.01/24.01.001/2014-15
July 1,  2014
Ashadha 10, 1936 (Saka)
All Scheduled  Commercial Banks
(Excluding  RRBs)
Dear Sir/Madam,
Master Circular – Para-banking Activities
Please  refer to the
Master  Circular No. DBOD.FSD.BC.05/24.01.001/2013-14 dated July 1, 2013
consolidating the  instructions/guidelines issued to banks till June 30, 2013 on para-banking activities. The
Master Circular
has been suitably updated by incorporating instructions issued up to June  30, 2014. The Master Circular  has been placed on the RBI website (
http://rbi.org.in
).
Yours faithfully
(Lily Vadera)
Chief General Manager
Encl:  As above
MASTER CIRCULAR – PARA-BANKING ACTIVITIES
Table  of Contents
Paragraph No.
Particulars
A
Purpose
B
Classification
C
Previous    Guidelines Consolidated
D
Scope    of Application
1.
Introduction
2.
Subsidiary    Companies
3.
Investment Ceiling in Subsidiaries and other Companies
4.
Relationship with Subsidiaries
5.
Relationship with Systemically Important NBFCs
6.
Banks’ Investment in Venture Capital Funds
7.
Banks as Sponsors to Infrastructure Debt Funds
8.
Equipment Leasing, Hire Purchase and Factoring    Businesses Buis business
9.
Primary    Dealership Business
10.
Underwriting    of Corporate Shares and Debentures
11.
Underwriting    of Bonds of Public Sector Undertakings
12.
Retailing    of Government Securities
13.
Mutual    Fund Business
14.
Money    Market Mutual Funds
15.
Cheque    Writing Facility for Investors of Money Market Mutual Funds
16.
Entry of Banks into Insurance    Business
17.
Pension    Fund Management by Banks
18.
Referral    Services
19.
Membership    of SEBI approved Stock Exchanges
20.
Portfolio    Management Services
21.
Safety    Net Schemes
22.
Disclosure    of Commissions/Remunerations
Annex-1 Financial    Services Companies
Annex-2 Definition    of Subsidiary, Associates, Joint ventures, Control and Significant Influence in terms of Indian    Accounting Standards
Annex-3 Entry of Banks into Insurance Business
Annex-4 Entry of Banks into Insurance Business – Insurance Agency Business/Referral    arrangement
Annex-5 Guidelines for Banks acting as Pension Fund Managers
Appendix List of Circulars Consolidated in the Master Circular
A. Purpose:
To provide a framework of rules/regulations/instructions to the  Scheduled Commercial Banks for undertaking certain financial services or  para-banking activities as permitted by RBI, excluding issue of credit, debit  and pre-paid cards for which a separate Master Circular has been issued. Banks  should adopt adequate safeguards and implement the following guidelines in  order to ensure that the financial services or para-banking activities  undertaken by them are run on sound and prudent lines.
B. Classification:
A statutory guideline issued by the RBI
C. Previous Guidelines Consolidated:
This Master  Circular consolidates the instructions contained in the circulars listed in the  Appendix.
D. Scope of Application:
To all  scheduled commercial banks (excluding RRBs) that undertake financial services or para-banking activities departmentally or  through their subsidiaries or affiliated companies controlled by them.
Structure:
Introduction
Subsidiary Companies
Investment Ceiling in Subsidiaries and other Companies
Relationship with Subsidiaries
Relationship with Systemically Important NBFCs
Banks’ Investment in Venture Capital Funds
Banks as Sponsors to Infrastructure Debt Funds
Equipment Leasing, Hire Purchase and Factoring Services  Businesses
Primary Dealership Business
Underwriting of Corporate Shares and Debentures
Underwriting of Bonds of Public Sector Undertakings
Retailing of Government Securities
Mutual Fund Business
Money Market Mutual Funds
Cheque Writing Facility for Investors of MMMFs
Insurance Business
Pension Fund Management by Banks
Referral Services
Membership of SEBI approved Stock Exchanges
Portfolio Management Services
Safety Net Schemes
Disclosure of Commissions/Remunerations
Annex-1
Financial Service Companies
Annex-2
Definition of Subsidiary,    Associates, Joint Ventures, Control and Significant Influence in terms of India Accounting Standards
Annex-3
Entry of Banks into Insurance    Business
Annex-4
Entry of Banks into Insurance    Business - Insurance Agency Business/Referral Arrangement
Annex-5
Guidelines for Banks acting as    Pension Fund Managers
Appendix
List of Circulars Consolidated by    the Master Circular
1. Introduction
Banks  can undertake certain eligible financial services or para-banking activities  either departmentally or by setting up subsidiaries. Banks may form a  subsidiary company for undertaking the types of businesses which a banking  company is otherwise permitted to undertake, with prior approval of Reserve Bank of India.  The instructions issued by Reserve Bank of India to banks for undertaking various  financial services or para-­banking  activities as permitted by RBI have been compiled in this Master Circular.
2. Subsidiary Companies
Under the provisions of  Section 19(1) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, banks may form subsidiary  companies for (i) undertaking of any business which is permissible under clauses (a) to (o) of sub-section 1 of  Section 6 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949; (ii) carrying on the  business of banking exclusively outside  India; and (iii) for such other business purposes which Reserve Bank of India may, with prior approval  of the Central Government, consider to be conducive to the spread of banking in  India or to be otherwise useful or necessary in public interest. Prior  approval of Reserve Bank of India should be taken by a bank to set up a  subsidiary company.
3. Investment Ceiling in Subsidiaries and other Companies
Under  the provisions of Section 19(2) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, a banking company cannot  hold shares in any company whether as pledgee, mortgagee or absolute owner of  an amount exceeding 30 per cent of the paid-up share capital of that company or 30 per  cent of its own paid-up share capital and reserves, whichever is less. However, unlike in the case of subsidiaries, there are  no statutory restrictions on the activities of companies in which banks can  hold equity within the ceiling laid down under section 19(2) of the B.R. Act.  In other words, these companies could be both financial services companies as  well as companies not engaged in financial services.
3.1
Prudential regulations for banks’  investments in subsidiaries and financial services companies
Equity investments by a bank in a subsidiary company, or  a financial services company, including financial institutions, stock and other  exchanges, depositories, etc., which is not a subsidiary should not exceed 10  per cent of the bank’s paid-up share capital and reserves and the total  investments made in all subsidiaries and all non-subsidiary financial services  companies should not exceed 20 per cent of the bank’s paid-up share capital and  reserves.
Banks cannot, however, participate in the equity of  financial services ventures including  stock exchanges, depositories, etc., without obtaining the prior specific  approval of Reserve Bank of India notwithstanding the fact that such  investments may be within the ceiling prescribed under Section 19(2) of the  Banking Regulation Act.
The cap of 20 per cent does not apply, nor is prior  approval of RBI required, if investments in financial services companies are  held under ‘Held for Trading’ category, and are not held beyond 90 days as  envisaged in the Master Circular on Prudential Norms for Classification, Valuation  and Operation of Investment Portfolio by Banks.
3.2
Prudential regulation for banks’  investments in non-financial services companies
Since  investments in non-financial services companies do not require prior approval  from RBI, banks could potentially acquire substantial equity holding in these  companies within the provisions of Section 19 (2) of the BR Act. It is,  therefore, possible that banks could, directly or indirectly through their  holdings in other entities, exercise control on or have significant influence  over such companies and thus, engage in activities directly or indirectly not  permitted to banks. This would be against the spirit of the provisions of the  Act and is not considered appropriate from prudential perspective. With the objective  to limit investments in non-financial services companies, the following  guidelines are laid down:
(a) Equity investment by a bank in companies  engaged in non-financial services activities would be subject to a limit of 10  per cent of the investee company’s paid up share capital or 10 per cent of the  bank’s paid up share capital and reserves, whichever is less. For the purpose  of this limit, equity investments held under ‘Held for Trading’ category would  also be reckoned. Investments within the above mentioned limits, irrespective  of whether they are in the ‘Held for Trading’ category or otherwise, would not  require prior approval of Reserve Bank of India.
(b) Equity investments in any non-financial  services company held by (a) a bank; (b) entities which are bank’s  subsidiaries, associates or joint ventures or entities directly or indirectly  controlled by the bank; and (c) mutual funds managed by Asset Management Companies  (AMCs) controlled by the bank should in the aggregate not exceed 20 per cent of  the investee company’s paid up share capital.
(c) A bank’s request for making investments in  excess of 10 per cent of such investee company’s paid up share capital, but not  exceeding 30 per cent, would be considered by RBI if the investee company is  engaged in non financial activities which are permitted to banks in terms of  Section 6(1) of the B. R. Act.
(d) A bank’s equity investments in subsidiaries  and other entities that are engaged in financial services activities together  with equity investments in entities engaged in non financial services  activities should not exceed 20 per cent of the bank’s paid-up share capital  and reserves. The cap of 20 per cent would not apply for investments classified  under ‘Held for Trading’ category and which are not held beyond 90 days.
(e) Equity holding by a bank in excess of 10  per cent of the non financial services investee company’s paid up capital would  be permissible without RBI’s prior approval (subject to the statutory limit of  30 per cent in terms of Section 19 (2) of the B.R. Act) if the additional  acquisition is through restructuring/Corporate Debt Restructuring (CDR), or  acquired by the bank to protect its interest on loans/investments made in a company.  The equity investment in excess of 10 per cent of the investee company’s paid  up share capital in such cases would be exempted from the 20 per cent limit  referred to above. However, banks will have to submit to RBI a time bound  action plan for disposal of such shares within a specified period.
3.3 For  the purposes of the above guidelines, financial services companies shall have  the meanings as detailed in
Annex 1
.  Also, the terms subsidiary, associate or joint venture shall have the meanings  assigned to them in Accounting Standards notified by the Central Government  under Section 211(3c) of the Companies Act, 1956 (extract enclosed as
Annex 2
).
4. Relationship  with Subsidiaries
The  sponsor bank is required to maintain an "arms length" relationship with the subsidiary/mutual fund sponsored by  it in regard to business parameters, such as, taking undue advantage in  borrowing/lending funds, transferring/selling/buying of securities at rates  other than market rates, giving special consideration for securities  transactions, overindulgence in supporting/financing the subsidiary, financing  the bank's clients through them when the bank itself is not able or is not  permitted to do so, etc. Supervision by the parent bank should not, however,  result in interference in the day-to-day management of the affairs of the  subsidiary/mutual fund. Banks should evolve appropriate strategies such as:
(a) The Board of Directors of the  parent/sponsor bank may review the working of subsidiaries/mutual fund at  periodical intervals (say once in six months) covering the major aspects  relating to their functioning and give proper guidelines/suggestions for  improvement, wherever considered necessary.
(b) The parent bank may cause inspection/audit  of the books and accounts of the subsidiaries/mutual fund at periodical  intervals, as appropriate, and ensure that the deficiencies noticed are  rectified without lapse of time. If a bank's own inspection staff is not  adequately equipped to undertake the inspection/audit, the task may be entrusted  to outside agencies like firms of chartered accountants. In case there is a technical  difficulty for causing inspection/audit (e.g. on account of non-existence of an  enabling clause in the Memorandum and Articles of Association of the subsidiary  or asset management company), steps should be taken to amend the same suitably.
(c) Where banks have equity participation by  way of portfolio investment in companies offering financial services, they may  review the working of the latter at least on an annual basis.
5. Relationship with Systemically Important Non-Banking Financial  Companies
The  regulatory gaps in the area of bank and NBFC operations contribute to creating  the possibility of regulatory arbitrage and hence may give rise to an uneven  playing field and systemic risk. In this backdrop, in December 2006, banks were  advised to follow the revised regulatory framework as regards their  relationship with systemically important NBFCs:
(a) NBFCs promoted by the parent/group of  a foreign bank having presence in India, which is a subsidiary of the foreign  bank's parent/group or where the parent/group is having management control  would be treated as part of that foreign bank's operations in India and brought  under the ambit of consolidated supervision as applicable to Indian banks.  Consequently, the concerned foreign banks should submit the Consolidated  Prudential Returns (CPR) to the Department of Banking Supervision and also  comply with the prudential regulations/norms prescribed to the consolidated  operations of that bank in India, as modified from time to time. These foreign  banks in India need not prepare 'consolidated financial statements' under  Accounting Standard 21 - Consolidated Financial Statements (AS 21). They may  consolidate the NBFCs with the bank's Indian operations on a line by line basis  for the purposes of consolidated prudential regulations by adopting the  principles of AS 21 as applicable to consolidation of subsidiaries. Where a  foreign bank is holding between 10% and 50% (both included) of the issued and  paid up equity of an NBFC, it will be required to demonstrate that it does not  have management control in case the NBFC is to be kept outside the ambit of  consolidated prudential regulations.
(b) Banks in India, including foreign  banks operating in India, shall not hold more than 10 % of the paid up equity  capital of an NBFC-D. This restriction would, however, not apply to investment  in housing finance companies.
6. Banks’ Investment in Venture Capital Funds
In  view of the significance of venture capital activities and the need for banks’  involvement in financing of Venture Capital Funds (VCFs), it is important to  address the relatively higher risks inherent in such exposures.
Accordingly, apart from  compliance with the provisions of Section 19(2) of Banking Regulation Act,  1949, as well as the prudential requirements stated at paragraph 3.1 above,  further guidelines relating to financing of VCFs were issued in terms of circular  DBOD.No.BP.BC.27/21.01.002/2006-07 dated August 23, 2006. This states,
inter alia
that banks should obtain prior approval of RBI for making strategic investment  in VCFs, i.e., investments equivalent to more than 10 per cent of the  equity/unit.
7. Banks as Sponsors to Infrastructure Debt  Funds
In  order to accelerate and enhance the flow of long term funds to infrastructure  projects for undertaking the Government’s ambitious programme of infrastructure  development, scheduled commercial banks have been allowed to act as sponsors to  Infrastructure Debt Funds (IDFs). IDFs can be set up either as Mutual Funds  (MFs) or as Non-Banking Finance Companies (NBFCs). While IDF-MFs will be  regulated by Securities & Exchange Board of India (SEBI), IDF-NBFCs will be  regulated by Reserve Bank of India (RBI). Banks can sponsor IDF-MFs and IDF-NBFCs  with prior approval from RBI, subject to the following conditions:
(i)
Sponsor to IDF-MF
Banks  may act as sponsors to IDF–MFs subject to adherence to SEBI regulations in this  regard.
(ii)
Sponsor to IDF – NBFC
A bank  acting as sponsor of IDF–NBFC shall contribute a minimum equity of 30 per cent  and maximum equity of 49 per cent of the IDF-NBFC. Since in terms of Section 19  (2) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, a bank cannot hold shares in excess of  30 per cent of the paid up share capital of a company, unless it is a  subsidiary, the Reserve Bank would, based on merits, recommend to the  Government to grant exemption from the provisions of Section 19(2) of the Act,  ( i.e., under Section 53 of the Act
ibid
) for investment in excess of 30  per cent and up to 49 per cent in the equity of the IDF-NBFC.
(iii)
General conditions for banks to act as  sponsors to IDFs – both under MF and NBFC structures
Investment by a bank in the equity of a single IDF – MF or  IDF-NBFC should not exceed 10 per cent of the bank’s paid up share capital and  reserves.
Investment by a bank  in the equity of subsidiary  companies, financial and non-financial services companies, financial  institutions, stock and other exchanges put together should not exceed 20 per  cent of the bank’s paid up share capital and reserves and this limit will also  cover the bank’s investments in IDFs as sponsors.
Banks’ exposures to IDFs - (MFs and NBFCs) by way of  contribution to paid up capital as sponsors will form part of their capital  market exposure and should be within the regulatory limits specified in this  regard.
Banks should have clear Board laid down policies and  limits for their overall infrastructure exposure which should include their  exposures as sponsors to IDFs - (MFs and NBFCs).
The IDFs - (MFs and NBFCs) should make a disclosure in the  prospectus/offer document at the time of inviting investments that the  sponsoring bank's liability is limited to the extent of its contribution to the  paid up capital.
8. Equipment Leasing,  Hire Purchase Business and Factoring Services
8.1 Banks  can form subsidiary companies for undertaking equipment leasing, hire  purchase and factoring businesses, with prior approval of Reserve Bank of India.  The following guidelines should govern the conduct of such business by the  banking companies:
(a) The  subsidiaries/ joint ventures formed should primarily be engaged in any of the  above mentioned activities and such other activities as are incidental to  equipment leasing, hire purchase business and factoring services. Equipment leasing/hire purchase  subsidiaries of banks should not take up issue management functions for other  companies engaged in hire purchase and leasing business. They should not engage  themselves in financing of other companies or concerns engaged in equipment leasing,  hire purchase business,  and factoring services, underwriting of public issues of shares and debentures  of those companies. These subsidiaries should also not take up the shares or  debentures of those companies on private placement basis.
(b) While banks may invest in other  equipment leasing/ hire purchase/factoring companies within the limits  specified in Section 19(2) of BR Act, 1949, with the Reserve Bank's prior  approval, they shall not act as promoters of such companies.
(c) Any application made in connection  with setting up of a subsidiary, or for a subsequent issue of capital, shall need  prior clearance from Reserve Bank of India.
8.2 The following needs to be observed by banks in setting up of factoring  services in relation to the factoring of receivables by factors vis-a-vis  borrowings from banks:
(a) Banks and factors should share  information about common borrowers. The format in which such information is to  be provided may be decided for the banks by the Indian Banks’ Association.
(b) Banks are required to issue letters of  disclaimer to the factor/s on book debts factored to facilitate assignment of  debt and factors in turn should route the proceeds of repayment and final  adjustment through the borrowers’ bank. In the case of consortium, the proceeds  may be routed through the leader of the consortium, while in the case of  multiple banking, it is left to each bank to protect its interest.
(c) Borrowers should declare separately  the extent of book debts proposed to be factored and those against which bank  finance is to be obtained in their projection for assessment of bank credit.  Banks may also take into account the finance availed under factoring while  sanctioning loans to the borrower. The borrower’s bank may also obtain from the  borrower periodical certificates regarding factored receivables to avoid double  financing.
(d) Factor may intimate the limits  sanctioned to the borrower to the concerned bank/s and details of debts  factored to avoid double financing. This could be cross checked with the  certificate obtained by banks from borrowers.
8.3 Banks can also undertake equipment  leasing, hire purchase and factoring services departmentally for which prior  approval of RBI is not necessary. Banks  should, however, report to RBI the nature of these activities together with the  names of the branches from where these activities are taken up. Banks should  comply with the following prudential guidelines when they undertake these  activities departmentally:
(a) As activities like equipment leasing, hire  purchase and factoring services require skilled  personnel and adequate infrastructural facilities, they should be undertaken  only by certain select branches of banks.
(b) These activities  should be treated on par with loans and advances and should accordingly be  given risk weight of 100 per cent for calculation of capital to risk asset ratio. Further,  the extant guidelines on income recognition, asset classification and provisioning would also be applicable  to them.
(c) The facilities  extended by way of equipment leasing, hire purchase finance and factoring  services would be covered within the extant exposure ceilings. Banks should maintain a balanced portfolio of equipment  leasing, hire purchase and factoring services
vis-à-vis
the aggregate credit.  Their exposure to any of these activities  should not exceed 10 per cent of total advances.
(d) Banks are required  to frame an appropriate policy on leasing business with the approval of their  Boards and evolve safeguards to avoid possible asset liability mismatch. While  banks are free to fix the period of lease finance in accordance with such policy,  they should ensure compliance with the Accounting Standard 19 (AS 19) prescribed by the Institute of  Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI).
(e) The finance  charge component of finance income [as defined in 'AS 19 on Leases' issued by the Council of the Institute  of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI)] on the leased asset, credited to income account on accrual basis before the  asset became non-performing, should  be reversed or provided for in the current accounting period, if remained  unpaid.
(f) Any changes brought about in respect of guidelines in  asset classification, income recognition and provisioning for loans/advances and other  credit facilities would also be applicable  to leased assets of banks undertaking leasing activity departmentally.
(g) Banks should not enter into leasing  agreement with equipment leasing companies and other non-banking finance  companies engaged in equipment leasing.
(h) Lease rental  receivables arising out of sub-lease of an asset by a non-banking financial company  undertaking leasing should not be included for the purpose of computation of bank finance for such  company.
(i) Banks undertaking factoring services departmentally  should carefully assess the client's working capital needs taking into account  the invoices purchased. Factoring services should be extended only in respect of those  invoices which represent genuine trade transactions. Banks should take particular care to  ensure that by extending factoring  services, the client is not over financed.
(j) Banks  should place Review Reports on equipment leasing, hire purchase, factoring,  etc., undertaken by them on annual basis before their Board of  Directors/Management Committee of the Board.
9. Primary Dealership Business
The permitted structure of  Primary Dealership (PD) business has been expanded to include banks and banks  fulfilling the following minimum eligibility criteria may apply to Reserve Bank  of India for approval for undertaking primary dealership business.
9.1
Eligibility  Criteria
The following categories of banks may  apply for PD licence:
(i) Banks,  which do not at present, have a partly or wholly owned subsidiary and fulfill  the following criteria:
Minimum Net Owned Funds of Rs. 1,000  crore
Minimum CRAR of 9 per cent
Net  NPAs of less than 3 per cent and a profit making record for the last three  years
(ii) Indian banks, undertaking PD business  through a partly or wholly owned subsidiary and proposing to undertake PD  business departmentally by merging/ taking over PD business from their  partly/wholly owned subsidiary should fulfill the criteria mentioned in 7.1.(i)  (a) to (c) above.
(ii) Foreign banks operating in India,  proposing to undertake PD business departmentally by merging the PD business  being undertaken by group companies should fulfill criteria at 7.1.(i) (a) to  (c).
9.2
Application for Primary Dealership
Banks eligible to apply  for primary dealership should approach the Department of Banking Operations and  Development (DBOD), Reserve Bank of India for in-principle approval. On obtaining  an in-principle approval from DBOD, banks may then apply to the Internal Debt  Management Department (IDMD), Reserve Bank of India for an authorisation for  undertaking PD business departmentally. The authorisation granted will be  subject to the guidelines issued by IDMD from time to time.
9.3 Prudential Norms
(i) The  capital adequacy and risk management guidelines will be as per the extant  guidelines applicable to banks. For the purpose of assessing the bank’s capital  adequacy requirement and coverage of risk management framework, the PD activity  should also be taken into account.
(ii) The Government Dated Securities and  Treasury Bills under PD business will count for Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR),  if they are notified by RBI as SLR securities.
(iii) The classification, valuation and  operation of investment portfolio guidelines as applicable to banks in regard  to “Held for Trading“ portfolio will also apply to the portfolio of Government  Dated Securities and Treasury Bills earmarked for PD business.
9.4
Regulation and Supervision
(i) RBI’s  instructions to primary dealers will apply to Bank-PDs to the extent  applicable.
(ii) As banks have access to the call money  market, refinance facility and the Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) of RBI,  Bank-PDs will not have separate access to these facilities and liquidity  support as available to standalone PDs.
(iii) RBI will conduct on-site inspection of  Bank-PD business.
(iv) Bank-PDs will be required to submit  prescribed returns, as advised by RBI from time to time.
(v) A Bank-PD should bring to RBI’s  attention any major complaint against it or action initiated/taken against it  by the authorities, such as, the stock exchanges, SEBI, CBI, Enforcement  Directorate, Income Tax, etc.
(vi) Reserve Bank of India reserves the  right to cancel the Bank-PD authorisation if, in its view, the concerned bank  has not fulfilled any of the prescribed eligibility and performance criteria.
9.5
Applicability  of the guidelines issued for primary dealers to bank-PDs
(i) The  Bank-PDs will be subject to underwriting and all other obligations as  applicable to standalone PDs as may be prescribed form time to time.
(ii) The Bank-PDs are expected to join the Primary  Dealers Association of India (PDAI) and the Fixed Income Money Market and  Derivatives Association (FIMMDA) and abide by the code of conduct framed by  them and such other actions initiated by them in the interests of the  securities markets.
(iii) The requirement of ensuring minimum  investment in Government Securities and Treasury Bills on a daily basis based  on net call/RBI borrowing and net owned funds will not be applicable to Bank-PDs.
(iv) It is clarified that for the purpose  of "when-issued trades" permitted vide circular IDMD.No/3426/11.01.01  (D)/2005-06 dated May 3, 2006, as amended from time to time, Bank-PDs will be  treated as primary dealers.
(v) Bank-PDs shall be guided by the extant  guidelines applicable to banks as regards borrowing in call/notice/term money  market, inter-corporate deposits, FCNR(B) loans/external commercial borrowings  and other sources of funds.
(vi) The investment policy of the bank may  be suitably amended to include PD activities also. Within the overall framework  of the investment policy, the PD business undertaken by the bank will be  limited to dealing, underwriting and market-making in Government Securities.  Investments in corporate/PSU/FI bonds, commercial  papers, certificate of deposits, debt mutual funds and other fixed income  securities will not be deemed to be a part of PD business.
9.6
Maintenance of books of accounts
(i) Transactions  related to primary dealership business, undertaken by a bank departmentally,  would be executed through the existing subsidiary general ledger (SGL) account  of the bank. However, such banks will have to maintain separate books of  accounts for transactions relating to PD business (distinct from normal banking  business) with necessary audit trails. It should be ensured that, at any point  of time, there is a minimum balance of Rs. 100 crore of Government Securities  earmarked for PD business.
(ii) Bank-PDs should subject the  transactions by PD department to concurrent audit. An auditor’s certificate for  having maintained the minimum stipulated balance of Rs. 100 crore of Government  Securities in the PD-book on an ongoing basis and having adhered to the  guidelines / instructions issued by RBI, should be forwarded to IDMD, RBI on a  quarterly basis.
10. Underwriting of Corporate Shares and  Debentures
Generally, there  are demands on banks as part of their merchant banking activities/merchant  banking subsidiaries to undertake underwriting of issues of shares and debentures of  their corporate customers. In order to ensure that there is no overexposure to  underwriting commitments,  the guidelines detailed below should be strictly adhered to:
(i) The statutory provision contained in Section 19(2) &  (3) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 regarding holding of shares in any company as  pledgee/mortgagee or absolute  owner, should be strictly adhered to.
(ii) As share and debenture floatations are  expected to be raised mainly from the public, banks are advised to desist from subscribing  directly to shares and debentures for the purpose of deployment of funds except  by way of –
Conversion  of loan into equity where it becomes necessary in terms of the loan agreements  and/or part of any rehabilitation programme
Contribution  to the equity of subsidiaries of the banks (e.g. leasing and merchant banking)  and;
Participation  in the equity of state sponsored corporations as may be permitted by policy  that may be evolved by Reserve Bank of India.
Banks have to  ensure that underwriting commitments taken up by them in respect of  primary issue of shares or convertible bonds or convertible debentures or units of  equity-oriented mutual funds comply with the ceiling prescribed for banks’ exposure to the capital markets.  However, with effect from April 17, 2008 banks may exclude their own  underwriting commitments, as also the underwriting commitments of their  subsidiaries, through the book running process for the purpose of arriving at  the capital market exposure both on a solo  and consolidated basis. The position in this regard would be reviewed at  a later date.
(iii) The underwriting exposure to any company is to be reckoned  for the purpose of arriving at the exposure limits for single and group  borrower as laid down in the Prudential Guidelines on Exposure Norms as amended from  time to time.
(iv) Banks could  consider sub-underwriting for every underwritten issue so as to minimise chances of devolution on  their own account. This is not mandatory. The need for and extent of such  sub-underwriting is a matter of bank’s discretion.
(v) While taking up underwriting obligations, banks should  subject the proposal for underwriting to proper scrutiny having regard to all  relevant factors and accept such commitments only on well reasoned commercial  considerations with the approval of the appropriate authority. It should also  be ensured that the prospect of devolution of such shares/debentures on  the underwriting banks will be minimal.
(vi) Banks should ensure that the portfolio is diversified and  that no unduly large underwriting obligations are taken up in the  shares and debentures of a company or a group of companies. Banks should make enquiries regarding  the other underwriters and  their capacity to fulfill the obligations.
(vii) Banks should not  underwrite issue of commercial paper by any company or primary dealer.
(viii) Banks should not  extend revolving underwriting facility to short term Floating Rate Notes/Bonds or debentures issued by  corporate entities.
(ix) An annual review  covering the underwriting operations taken up during the year, with company-wise  details of such operations, the shares/debentures devolved on banks, the loss  (or expected loss) from unloading the devolved shares/debentures indicating the  face-value and market value thereof, the commission earned, etc. may be placed before their Boards of  Directors within 2 months of the close of the fiscal year.
(x) Banks/merchant  banking subsidiaries of banks undertaking underwriting activities are also required  to comply with the guidelines contained in the SEBI (Underwriters) Rules and Regulations, 1993, as  amended from time to time.
11. Underwriting  of Bonds of Public Sector Undertakings
(i) Banks  can play a useful role in relation to issue of bonds by Public Sector Undertakings  (PSUs) by underwriting a part of these issues. They may also subscribe outright  initially but sell them later to the public with the aid of their wide branch  network. It should, however, be ensured that the increase in the holdings of  public sector bonds by banks arising out of their underwriting or subscription  is kept within reasonable limits. While undertaking underwriting of bonds of  PSUs, banks should formulate their own internal guidelines as approved by their  Boards of Directors on investments in and underwriting of PSU bonds, including  norms to ensure that excessive investment in any single PSU is avoided and that  due attention is given to the maturity structure of such investments.
(ii) Banks  should also ensure that such investments are subject to risk weight and  necessary depreciation has been fully provided for.
(iii) Banks  should undertake an annual review of the underwriting operations relating to  bonds of public sector undertakings, with PSU-wise details of such operations,  bonds devolved on the banks, the loss (or expected loss) from unloading the  devolved bonds indicating the face-value and market value thereof, the  commission earned, etc., and place the same before their Boards of Directors  within two months from the close of the fiscal year.
12. Retailing  of Government Securities
Banks are permitted to undertake the  business of retailing of Government Securities with non-bank clients subject to  the following conditions:
(i) Banks  are free to buy and sell Government Securities on an outright basis at  prevailing market prices without any restriction on the period between sale and  purchase.
(ii) Banks  shall not undertake ready forward transactions in Government Securities with  non-bank clients.
(iii) The  retailing of Government Securities should be on the basis of ongoing market  rates/yields emerging out of secondary market transactions.
(iv) No  sale of Government Securities should be effected by banks unless they hold the  securities in their portfolio either in the form of physical scrips or in the  SGL Account maintained with Reserve Bank of India.
(v) Immediately  on sale, the corresponding amount should be deducted by the bank from its  investment account and also from its SLR assets.
(vi) Banks  should put in place adequate internal control checks/mechanism in this regard.
(vii) These  transactions should be subjected to concurrent audit as per RBI’s extant  instructions and should also be looked into by the auditors at the time of  bank’s statutory audit.
13. Mutual  Fund Business
13.1 Banks desirous of undertaking mutual  fund business should obtain prior approval of Reserve Bank of India for setting  up such funds subject to the following:
(i) Bank-sponsored  mutual funds should comply with the guidelines issued by SEBI from time to  time.
(ii) The  bank-sponsored mutual funds should not use the name of the sponsoring bank as  part of their name, except where a suitable disclaimer clause is inserted while  publicising new schemes that the bank is not liable or responsible for any loss  or shortfall resulting from the operations of the scheme.
13.2 Banks may enter into agreements  with mutual funds for marketing the mutual fund units subject to the following  terms and conditions:
(i) Banks  should only act as an agent of the customers, forwarding the investors’  applications for purchase/sale of MF units to the mutual funds/Registrars/transfer  agents. The purchase of units should be at the customers’ risk and without the  bank guaranteeing any assured return.
(ii) Banks  should not acquire units of mutual funds from the secondary market.
(iii) Banks  should not buy back units of mutual funds from their customers.
(iv) If  a bank proposes to extend any credit facility to individuals against the  security of units of Mutual Funds, sanction of such facility should be in  accordance with the extant instructions of RBI on advances against  shares/debentures and units of mutual funds.
(v) Banks  holding custody of MF units on behalf of their customers should ensure that  their own investments and investments made by/belonging to their customers are  kept distinct from each other.
(vi) Banks  should put in place adequate and effective control mechanisms in this regard.  Besides, with a view to ensuring better control, retailing of units of mutual  funds may be confined to certain select branches of a bank.
14. Money Market Mutual Funds
Money Market  Mutual Funds (MMMFs) come under the purview of SEBI regulations. However, banks  desirous of setting up MMMFs would have to seek necessary clearance from RBI  for undertaking this additional activity before approaching SEBI for  registration.
15. Cheque Writing Facility for Investors of Mutual Funds/Money Market  Mutual Funds
Banks  are permitted to tie-up with MMMFs as also with MFs in respect of Gilt Funds  and Liquid Income Schemes which predominantly invest in money market  instruments (not less than 80 per cent of the corpus) to offer cheque writing  facilities to investors subject to the following safeguards:
(i) In  the case of a MMMF set up by a bank, the tie-up arrangement should be with the  sponsor bank. In other cases, the tie-up should be with a designated bank. The  name of the bank should be clearly indicated in the Offer Document of the  Scheme.
(ii) The Offer Document should clearly  indicate that the tie-up to offer cheque writing facility is purely a  commercial arrangement between the MMMF/MF and the designated bank, and as  such, the servicing of the units of MMMF/MF will not in any way be the direct  obligation of the bank concerned. This should be clearly stated in all public  announcements and communications to individual investors.
(iii) The facility to any single investor in  the MMMF/MF can be permitted at the investor’s option, in only one of the  branches of the designated bank.
(iv) It  should be in the nature of a drawing account, distinct from any other account,  with clear limits for drawals, the number of cheques that can be drawn, etc, as  prescribed by the MMMF/MF. It should not, however, be used as a regular bank  account and cheques drawn on this account should only be in favour of the  investor himself (as part of redemption) and not in favour of third parties. No  deposits can be made in the account. Each drawal made by the investor under the  facility should be consistent with the terms prescribed by the MMMF/MF and  treated as redemption of the holdings in the MMMF/MF to that extent.
(v) The  facility can be availed of by investors only after the minimum lock-in period  of 15 days for investments in MMMFs (not applicable in the case of eligible  Gilt Funds and Liquid Income Schemes of mutual funds and any prescription of  lock-in-period in such cases will be governed by SEBI Regulations).
(vi) The  bank should ensure pre-funding of the drawing account by the MMMF/MF at all  times and review the funds position on a daily basis.
(vii) Such  other measures as may be considered necessary by the bank.
16. Entry  of Banks into Insurance Business
16.1  Banks intending to set up insurance joint ventures with equity contribution on  risk participation basis or making investments in insurance companies for  providing infrastructure and services support should obtain prior approval of Reserve  Bank of India before engaging in such business as per the guidelines set out in
Annex - 3
. Banks may, therefore, submit necessary applications to  RBI furnishing full details in respect of the parameters as specified in the  above guidelines, details of equity contribution proposed in the joint  venture/strategic investment, the name of the company with whom the bank would  have tie-up arrangements in any manner in insurance business, etc. The relative Board note and  Resolution passed thereon approving  the bank’s proposal together with viability report prepared in this regard may also be forwarded to Reserve Bank of India.  However, insurance business will not be permitted to be undertaken  departmentally by banks.
16.2 Banks  need not obtain prior approval of RBI for engaging in insurance agency business  or referral arrangement without  any risk participation, subject to the conditions stated in
Annex-4
.
17. Pension Fund Management by Banks
Consequent  upon the issue of Government of India Notification F.No.13/6/2005-BOA dated May 24, 2007  specifying “acting as Pension Fund Manager” as a form of business in which it would be lawful  for a banking company to engage in, in exercise of the powers conferred by clause (o) of sub-section (1) of Section 6 of  the Banking Regulation Act, 1949,  banks have been advised that they may undertake Pension Fund Management (PFM) through subsidiaries set up for the purpose with prior  approval of RBI, and subject to  satisfying the eligibility criteria prescribed by Pension Fund Regulatory and  Development Authority (PFRDA) for Pension  Fund Managers. Pension Fund Management should not be undertaken departmentally.  Banks intending to undertake pension  fund management as per the guidelines set out in
Annex-5
should furnish  full details in respect of the various eligibility criteria as specified in
Annex-5
along with the details of the equity contribution proposed to be made in the subsidiary. The relative Board Note  and Resolution approving the bank’s proposal together with a detailed  viability report prepared in this regard may also be forwarded to the Reserve  Bank.
18. Referral Services
There  is no objection to banks offering referral services to their customers for  financial products  subject to the following conditions:
(a) The bank/third  party issuers of the financial products should strictly adhere to the Know Your  Customer (KYC)/Anti-Money  Laundering (AML) guidelines in respect of the customers who are being referred  to the third party issuers of the products.
(b) The bank should  ensure that the selection of third party issuers of the financial products is  done in such a manner so as to take care of the reputational risks to which the bank may  be exposed to in dealing with the third party issuers of the products.
(c) The bank should  make it explicitly clear upfront to the customer that it is purely a referral service and strictly on a  non-risk participation basis.
(d) The third party  issuers should adhere to the relevant regulatory guidelines applicable to them.
(e) While offering  referral services, the bank should strictly adhere to the relevant RBI guidelines.
19. Membership  of SEBI approved Stock Exchanges
19.1 Banks in India as  well as the overseas branches of Indian banks are permitted to transact in  Interest Rate Futures (IRFs) for the purpose of hedging the risk in their  underlying investment portfolio as well as trading positions in IRFs. It is,  however, clarified that banks are not allowed to undertake transactions in IRFs  on behalf of clients. In this context, banks are advised to ensure adherence to  instructions as regards setting of limits for non-option derivatives contracts  as amended form time to time.
19.2 Scheduled commercial banks (AD  Category I) have been permitted to become trading/clearing members of the  currency derivatives segment to be set up by the stock exchanges recognized by  SEBI, subject to their fulfilling the following prudential requirements:
Minimum net worth of Rs. 500 crore
Minimum CRAR of 10%
Net NPA not exceeding 3%
Net profit for last 3 years
Banks which fulfill the  conditions mentioned above should lay down detailed guidelines with their  Board's approval for conduct of this activity and management of risks. It  should be ensured that the bank’s position is kept distinct from the clients'  position. In case of supervisory discomfort with the functioning of a bank, the  Reserve Bank may impose restrictions on the bank regarding the conduct of this  business as it deems fit.
Banks which do not meet  the above minimum prudential requirements are permitted to participate in the  currency futures market only as clients.
19.3 In order to further  enhance transparency in the corporate bond market in India, Scheduled Commercial  Banks (SCBs) are permitted to become members of SEBI approved stock exchanges  for the purpose of undertaking proprietary transactions in the corporate bond  market. While doing so, SCBs should satisfy the membership criteria of the  stock exchanges and also comply with the regulatory norms laid down by SEBI and  the respective stock exchanges.
20. Portfolio  Management Services
20.1 The general powers vested in banks to operate Portfolio  Management Services and similar schemes have been withdrawn vide our circular DBOD.No.BC.73/27.07.001/94-95  dated June 7, 1994 on Acceptance of Deposits/Funds under Portfolio Management  Scheme. No bank should, therefore, restart or introduce any new PMS or similar  scheme in future without obtaining specific prior approval of RBI. However,  bank-sponsored NBFCs are allowed to offer discretionary PMS to their clients,  on a case-to-case basis.
20.2 The following conditions are to be strictly observed by banks  operating PMS or similar scheme with the specific prior approval of RBI:
(a) Only those banks which can provide such services on their own  should undertake the activity. Funds accepted for portfolio management from  their clients, should not be entrusted to another bank for management.
(b) 'PMS' should be in the nature of investment  consultancy/management, for a fee, entirely at the customer's risk without  guaranteeing, either directly or indirectly, a pre-determined return. The bank  should charge a definite fee for the services rendered independent of the  return to the client.
(c) 'PMS' should be provided by banks/their subsidiaries to their  clients in respect of the latter's long term investable funds for enabIing them  to build up a portfolio of securities; in any case, the funds should not be  accepted for portfolio management for a period less than one year. In the case  of placement of funds for portfolio management by the same client on more than  one occasion, on a continuous basis, each such placement should be treated as a  separate account and each such placement should be for a minimum period of one  year.
(d) The funds accepted for portfolio management, are essentially  expected to be deployed in capital market instruments, such as, shares,  debentures, bonds, securities, etc. In any case, portfolio funds should not be  deployed for lending in call money/bills market, and lending to/placement with  corporate bodies.
(e) The bank providing PMS to its clients should maintain client  wise account/record of funds accepted and investments made there against, and  all credits (including realised interest, dividend, etc.) and debits relating  to the portfolio account should be put through such account. The tax deducted  at source in respect of interest/dividend on securities held in the portfolio account  should be reflected in the portfolio account. The account holder should be  entitled to get a statement of his portfolio account.
(f) The bank’s own investments and investments belonging to the  PMS clients should be kept distinct from each other. If there were any  transactions between the bank’s investment account and portfolio account, they  should be strictly at market rates. Though the bank could hold the securities  belonging to the portfolio account in its own name on behalf of its PMS  clients, there should be a clear indication that the securities were held by it  on behalf of ‘portfolio account’. Similarly, while putting through any  transaction on behalf of a portfolio account, a clear indication should be  given to the effect that the transaction pertained to the ‘portfolio account’.
(g) In the bank’s general ledger a ‘Clients’ Portfolio Account’  should be maintained and all the funds received by it for portfolio management  should be reflected in it on a day-to-day basis. The balance lying in this  account (i.e. the funds undeployed, if any, from this account) should be  treated as outside borrowings of the bank and it should maintain Cash Reserve Ratio  (CRR)/Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) on such funds. The bank’s liability to  its clients in respect of funds accepted by it for portfolio management should  be properly reflected in the published books of accounts of the  bank/subsidiary.
(h) There should be a clear  functional separation of trading and back office functions relating to banks'  own investment accounts and PMS clients' accounts.
(i) PMS clients' accounts should be  subjected by banks to a separate audit by external auditors as covered (vide  paragraph 3.II (I) of circular DBOD.No.BC.143A/24.048.001/91-92 dated June 20,  1992)
(j) Banks should note that violation  of RBI instructions will be viewed seriously and will invite deterrent action  against the banks, which will include raising of reserve requirements,  withdrawal of facility of refinance from RBI and denial of access to money  markets, apart from prohibition from undertaking PMS activity.
(k) Further, the aforesaid  instructions will apply,
mutatis mutandis
, to the subsidiaries of banks  except where they are contrary to specific regulations of RBI or SEBI,  governing their operations.
(l) Banks/merchant banking  subsidiaries of banks operating PMS or similar scheme with the specific prior  approval of RBI are also required to comply with the guidelines contained in  the SEBI (Portfolio Managers) Rules and Regulations, 1993 and those issued from  time to time.
21. Safety  Net Schemes
Reserve Bank of India had  observed that some banks/their subsidiaries were providing buy back facilities  under the name of ‘Safety Net’ Schemes in respect of certain public issues as  part of their merchant banking activities. Under such schemes, large exposures  are assumed by way of commitments to buy the relative securities from the  original investors at any time during a stipulated period at a price determined  at the time of issue, irrespective of the prevailing market price. In some  cases, such schemes were offered
suo moto
without any request from the  company whose issues are supported under the schemes. Apparently, there was no  undertaking in such cases from the issuers to buy the securities. There is also  no income commensurate with the risk of loss built into these schemes, as the  investor will take recourse to the facilities offered under the schemes only  when the market value of the securities falls below the pre-determined price.  Banks/their subsidiaries have therefore been advised that they should refrain  from offering such ‘Safety Net’ facilities by whatever name called.
22. Disclosure of Commissions/Remunerations
22.1 In terms of paragraph  13 of this circular, banks have been advised that they can enter into  agreements with mutual funds for marketing the mutual fund units subject to  certain terms and conditions. Similarly, in terms of paragraph 16 of this  circular, banks have been advised that they need not obtain prior approval of  RBI for engaging in insurance agency business or referral arrangement without  any risk participation, subject to the conditions stipulated in
Annex 4
of this circular. Banks have also been permitted, vide paragraph 18 of this  circular, to offer purely referral services on a non-risk participation basis  to their customers, for financial products subject to certain conditions. In  addition to the above, banks also provide non-discretionary Investment Advisory  Services to their clients for which approvals are granted by Reserve Bank of  India on a case–to–case basis.
22.2 Further, in some  cases, banks have also been permitted to offer discretionary portfolio management  services, through their subsidiaries, subject to certain conditions. In all the  activities referred to above, it is likely that banks may be marketing/referring,  several competing products of various mutual fund/insurance/financial services  companies to their customers. Keeping in view the need for transparency in the  interest of the customers to whom the products are being marketed/referred,  banks are advised to disclose to their customers, details of all the  commissions/other fees (in any form) received, if any, from the various mutual  fund/insurance/other financial services companies for marketing/referring their  products. This disclosure would be required even in cases where the bank is  marketing/distributing/referring products of only one mutual fund/insurance  company.
22.3 In order to increase transparency in the financial  statements of banks, Reserve Bank of India has from time to time issued circulars  to banks requiring disclosures in the 'Notes to Accounts' to their Balance  Sheet. As a further step in enhancing transparency, it has been decided that  banks should disclose in the 'Notes to Accounts', from the year ending March  31, 2010, the details of fees/remuneration received in respect of the  bancassurance business undertaken by them.
Annex 1
[Paragraph  3]
Financial Services Companies
For the purpose of prudential guidelines on  investments in subsidiaries and other companies, ‘financial services companies’  are companies engaged in the ‘business of financial services’. The ‘business of  financial services’ means –
the forms of business enumerated in clauses  (a), (c), (d), (e) of sub-section (1) of section 6 of the Banking Regulation  Act, 1949 and notified under clause (o) of sub-section (1) of section 6 of the  Banking Regulation Act, 1949;
the forms of business enumerated in clause  (c) and clause (f) of Section 45 I of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934;
business of credit information as provided  under the Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005;
operation of a payment system as defined  under the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007;
operation of a stock exchange, commodity  exchange, derivatives exchange or other exchange of similar nature;
operation of a depository as provided under  the Depositories Act, 1996;
business of a securitisation or  reconstruction company as provided under the Securitisation and Reconstruction  of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002;
business of a  merchant banker, portfolio manager, stock broker, sub-broker, share transfer  agent, trustee of trust deeds, registrar to an issue, merchant banker, underwriter,  debenture trustee, investment adviser and such other intermediary as provided  in the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 and the regulations  made thereunder;
business of a credit rating agency as defined  in the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Credit Rating Agencies)  Regulations, 1999;
business of a collective investment scheme as  defined under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992;
business of managing a pension fund;
business of an authorised person as defined  under the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999; and
such other business as may be specified by  Reserve Bank from time to time.
Annex  2
[Paragraph-3]
Definition of  Subsidiary, Associates, Joint Ventures, ‘Control and Significant Influence’ in  terms of Indian Accounting Standards
Accounting Standards 18, 21, 23 and 27 define  the above mentioned terms.
Subsidiary is an enterprise that is controlled  by another enterprise (known as the parent).
An
Associate
is an  enterprise in which the investor has significant influence and which is neither  a subsidiary nor a joint venture of the investor, and
Joint Venture
is a contractual arrangement whereby two or  more parties undertake an economic activity, which is subject to joint control.
Significant Influence
is the power to participate in the financial  and/or operating policy decisions of the investee but not control over its policies.
Control
–
The  ownership, directly or indirectly, through subsidiary(ies), of more than  one-half of the voting power of an enterprise; or
Control of  the composition of the board of directors in the case of a company or of the  composition of the corresponding governing body in case of any other enterprise  so as to obtain economic benefits from its activities.
Control exists when the parent owns, directly  or indirectly through subsidiary(ies), more than one-half of the voting power  of an enterprise. Control also exists when an enterprise controls the  composition of the board of directors (in the case of a company) or of the  corresponding governing body (in case of an enterprise not being a company) so  as to obtain economic benefits from its activities.
An enterprise is considered to control the  composition of the board of directors of a company, if it has the power,  without the consent or concurrence of any other person, to appoint or remove  all or a majority of directors of that company. An enterprise is deemed to have  the power to appoint a director, if any, if the following conditions are  satisfied:
a person cannot be appointed as director  without the exercise in his favour by that enterprise of such a power as  aforesaid; or
a person’s appointment as director follows  necessarily from his appointment to a position held by him in that enterprise;  or
the director is nominated by that enterprise;  in case that enterprise is a company, the director is nominated by that  company/subsidiaries thereof.
For the purpose of AS 23,  significant influence does not extend to power to govern the financial and/or  operating policies of an enterprise. Significant influence may be gained by  share ownership, statute or agreement. As regards share ownership, if an  investor holds, directly or indirectly through subsidiary(ies), 20% or more of  the voting power of the investee, it is presumed that the investor has  significant influence, unless it can be clearly demonstrated that this is not  the case. Conversely, if the investor holds, directly or indirectly through  subsidiary(ies), less than 20% of the voting power of the investee, it is  presumed that the investor does not have significant influence, unless such  influence can be clearly demonstrated. A substantial or major ownership by  another investor does not necessarily preclude an investor from having  significant influence. The existence of significant influence by an investor is  usually evidenced in one or more of the following ways:
representation  on the board of directors or corresponding governing body of the investee;
participation  in policy making processes;
material  transactions between the investor and the investee;
interchange  of managerial personnel; and
provision of essential technical information.
Annex 3
[Paragraph-16]
Entry of Banks  into Insurance Business
1. Banks which  satisfy the eligibility criteria given below will be permitted to set up a joint venture  company for undertaking insurance business with risk participation, subject to  safeguards. The maximum equity such a bank can hold in the joint venture company will normally be 50 per cent  of the paid-up capital of the insurance company. On a selective basis, Reserve Bank of India may permit a higher equity  contribution by a promoter bank initially, pending divestment of equity  within the prescribed period (see Note 1  below).
The eligibility  criteria for joint venture participant are as under:
the net worth of  the bank should not be less than Rs.500 crore;
the CRAR of the  bank should not be less than 10 per cent;
the level of  non-performing assets should be reasonable;
the bank should  have net profit for the last three consecutive years; and
the track record  of the performance of the subsidiaries, if any, of the concerned bank should be  satisfactory.
2. In  cases where a foreign partner contributes 26 per cent of the equity with the  approval of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA)/Foreign  Investment Promotion Board (FIPB), more than one public sector bank or private  sector bank may be allowed to participate in the equity of the insurance  joint venture. As such participants will also assume insurance risk, only those  banks which satisfy the criteria given in paragraph 1 above, would be permitted.
3. A subsidiary of a bank or of  another bank will not normally be allowed to join the insurance company  on risk participation basis. Subsidiaries would include bank subsidiaries undertaking merchant  banking, securities, mutual fund, leasing finance, housing finance business, etc.
4. Banks which are  not eligible as joint venture participant as above, can make investments up to  10 per cent of their net worth or Rs.50 crore, whichever is lower, in the insurance  company for providing infrastructure and services support. Such participation shall be treated as an investment and  should be without any contingent liability for the bank.
The eligibility criteria for these  banks will be as under:
the CRAR of the bank should not be less than 10 per cent;
the level of NPAs should be reasonable;
the bank should have net profit for the last three  consecutive years.
5. All banks entering into  insurance business will be required to obtain prior approval of the Reserve Bank. The Reserve Bank will give  permission to banks on a case-to-case basis keeping in view all relevant  factors including the position in regard to the level of non-performing assets of the applicant bank so as  to ensure that non-performing assets do not pose any future threat to  the bank in its present or the proposed line of activity, viz., insurance business. It should be ensured that risks  involved in insurance business do  not get transferred to the bank and that the banking business does not get contaminated  by any risks which may arise from insurance business. There should be ‘arms  length’ relationship between the bank and the insurance outfit.
Note:
1. Holding of equity by a promoter bank in an insurance  company or participation in any form  in insurance business will be subject to compliance with any rules and  regulations laid down by the IRDA/Central  Government. This will include compliance with Section 6AA of the Insurance Act as amended by the IRDA Act,  1999, for divestment of equity in excess of 26 per cent of the paid up  capital within a prescribed period of time.
2. Latest audited balance sheet will be considered for  reckoning the eligibility criteria.
3. Banks which make investments under paragraph 4 of the above guidelines, and later qualify for risk participation in insurance business (as  per paragraph 1 of the guidelines) will be  eligible to apply to the Reserve Bank for permission to undertake insurance business on risk participation basis.
Annex  4
[Paragraph-16]
Entry of Banks into Insurance Business  - Insurance Agency Business/Referral Arrangement
Scheduled commercial banks are permitted to undertake  insurance business as agent of insurance companies on fee basis, without any  risk participation. The subsidiaries of banks will also be allowed to undertake  distribution of insurance product on agency basis. Banks need not obtain prior approval of RBI for engaging  in insurance agency business or referral arrangement without any risk  participation, subject to the following conditions:
The bank should comply with the IRDA regulations for  acting as ‘composite corporate  agent’ or referral arrangement with insurance companies.
The bank should not adopt any restrictive practice of  forcing its customers to go in only for a particular insurance company in respect of  assets financed by the bank. The customers  should be allowed to exercise their own choice.
The bank desirous of entering into referral arrangement,  besides complying with IRDA regulations, should also enter into an agreement  with the insurance company concerned for allowing use of its premises and making use  of the existing infrastructure of the bank. The agreement should be for a period not  exceeding three years at the first instance and the bank should have the discretion to  renegotiate the terms depending on its satisfaction with the service or replace it by  another agreement after the initial period. Thereafter, the bank will be free  to sign a longer term contract with the approval of its Board in the case of a  private sector bank and with the approval of the Government of India in respect of a public sector  bank.
As the participation by a bank’s customer in insurance  products is purely on a voluntary basis, it should be stated in all publicity material  distributed by the bank in a prominent way. There should be no ’linkage’ either direct  or indirect between the provision of banking services offered by the bank to  its customers and use of the insurance  products.
The risks, if any, involved in insurance  agency/referral arrangement should not get transferred  to the business of the bank.
Annex 5
[Paragraph 17]
Guidelines for Banks' Acting as Pension Fund Managers
1. Eligibility Criteria
Banks will be allowed to  undertake Pension Fund Management (PFM) through their subsidiaries only. Pension fund management should not be undertaken departmentally.  Banks may lend their names/abbreviations to their subsidiaries formed for pension fund management, for leveraging their  brand names and associated benefits thereto,  only subject to the banks maintaining ‘arms length' relationship with the  subsidiary. In order to provide adequate safeguards against associated risks  and ensure that only strong and credible  banks enter into the business of pension fund management, banks complying with  the following eligibility criteria (as also the solvency margin prescribed by PFRDA) may approach Reserve Bank of India  for necessary permission to enter into the business of pension funds  management:
Net worth of the  bank should be not less than Rs.500 crore.
CRAR should be  not less than 11 per cent during the last three years.
The bank should  have made net profit for the last three consecutive years.
Return on Assets (ROA) should be at least 0.6 per cent  or more.
Level of net  non-performing assets (NPAs) should be less than 3 per cent
Performance of the bank's subsidiary(ies), if any,  should be satisfactory.
Management of the bank's investment portfolio should be  good as per the AFI Report of the Reserve Bank and there should not be any  adverse remark(s) in the Report involving supervisory concerns.
2. Pension Fund Subsidiary – Safeguards
Banks fulfilling  the above eligibility criteria as also the criteria prescribed by PFRDA for pension fund  managers will be permitted to set up subsidiaries for pension fund management  subject to the following conditions:
The  bank should obtain the prior permission of the Reserve Bank for investing in  the equity for the purpose of setting up the  subsidiary. Transferring or otherwise dealing with its shareholding in  the subsidiary in any manner would also require prior approval of the Reserve  Bank.
Composition of the Board of Directors of the subsidiary  should be broad based and should  be as per the guidelines, if any, prescribed by PFRDA.
The parent bank should maintain "arms length"  with the subsidiary. Any transaction between  the bank and the subsidiary should be at market related rates.
Any further equity contribution by the bank to the  subsidiary should be with prior approval  of the Reserve Bank and total equity contribution by the bank to the subsidiary  at any point of time should be within 10 per cent of the bank’s paid-up capital  and reserves.
The bank’s total investment by way of equity contributions  in its existing subsidiaries, the proposed pension funds subsidiary and  those formed in future together with portfolio investments in other financial and  non-financial services companies as well as mutual funds should not exceed 20% of its paid-up capital  and reserves.
The parent bank’s Board should lay down a comprehensive  risk management policy for the group as a whole including the subsidiary;  incorporating appropriate risk management  tools. It should also ensure effective implementation thereof.
The bank should evolve a suitable system to monitor operations  of the subsidiary.
The subsidiary should confine itself to the business of  pension fund management and  any other business, which is purely incidental and directly related thereto.
The pension fund subsidiary should not set up another  subsidiary without prior approval  of the Reserve Bank.
The subsidiary should not promote a new company, which is  not a subsidiary thereof,  without prior approval of the Reserve Bank.
The subsidiary should not make any portfolio investment in  another existing company with an intention of acquiring controlling  interest, without prior approval of the Reserve  Bank.
The bank should submit a Business Plan to the Reserve  Bank highlighting the business projections of the subsidiary for the first five  years so as to determine whether the subsidiary would be able to comply with the solvency  margin as may be prescribed by PFRDA  and not fall back on the bank for augmenting its capital for the purpose.
The permission granted by the Reserve Bank to a bank to  set up the subsidiary shall be without prejudice to the decision of PFRDA to  grant a license to the subsidiary to  do the pension fund management business.
The subsidiary should abide by all the instructions,  guidelines etc., on pension fund  management issued by PFRDA from time to time.
The bank should ensure that the subsidiary does not have  on-line access to the customers'  accounts maintained with the bank.
In  order to maintain systems integrity of the bank, adequate safeguards between  the systems of the bank and that of the subsidiary should be put in place by  the bank.
The bank should strictly comply with the reporting  requirements prescribed under the  "financial conglomerates" framework, wherever applicable.
The bank should not grant any unsecured advances to  the JV or subsidiary without prior approval of the Reserve Bank.
Appendix
List of Circulars  consolidated in the Master Circular
No
Circular No.
Date
Subject
1.
RBI/2012-13/494    IDMD.PDRD.No.3089/03.64.027/2012-13
May    08, 2013
Submission of    undertaking : Renewal of Authorisation
2.
RBI/2012-13/277    DBOD.No.FSD.BC.53/24.01.001/2012-13
November    5, 2012
Corporate Bond    Market- Permission to banks for membership of SEBI approved Stock Exchanges
3.
RBI/2011-12/297    DBOD.FSD.BC.62/24.01.001/2011-12
December    12, 2011
Section 19 of the    Banking Regulation Act, 1949 -Investment in subsidiaries and other    companies-Guidelines
4.
RBI/2011-12/269 DBOD.FSD.BC.No.571/24.01.006/2011-12
November    21, 2011
Banks as sponsors    to Infrastructure Debt Funds (IDFs)
5.
RBI/2011-12/162    IDMD.PCD.9/14.03.05/2011-12
August    30, 2011
Authorisation    Guidelines for Primary Dealers (PDs)
6.
RBI/2009-10/283    DBOD.No.FSD.BC.67/24.01.001/2009-10
January    07, 2010
Disclosure in Balance Sheet -
Bancassurance    Business
7.
RBI/2009-10/225    DBOD.No.FSD.BC.60/24.01.001/2009-10
November
16, 2009
Marketing/Distribution of    Mutual
Fund/ Insurance etc., Products    by
Banks
8.
RBI/2009-10/35    DBOD.BP.BC.No.34/21.04.157/2009-10
August 28, 2009
Guidelines    for Exchange Traded Interest Rate Derivatives
9.
RBI/2008-9/217    DBOD.BP.BC.No.56/21.04.157/2009-10
October 13, 2008
Guidelines    for Exchange Traded Interest Rate Derivatives
10.
DBOD.No.FSD.BC.29/24.01.001/2008-09
August 6, 2008
Introduction of    Currency Futures –
Permitting Banks to    become Trading/ Clearing Members of SEBI-Approved Exchanges
11.
RBI/2009-10/65    DBOD.No.FSD.BC.18/24.01.001/2009-10
July 1, 2009
Master Circular on    Para Banking Activities
12.
Mailbox clarification
April 17, 2008
Public issue of    shares and debentures- Underwriting by banks/ subsidiaries
13.
RBI/2006    -2007/446 DBOD.No.FSD.BC.102/24.01.022/2006-07
June 28,
2007
Pension    Fund Management (PFM)    by banks
14.
RBI/2006-07/205 DBOD.No.FSD.BC.46/24.01.028/2006-07
December    12, 2006
Financial    Regulation of Systemically Important NBFCs and Banks’ Relationship with them    – Final Guidelines
15.
RBI/2006-07/140    IDM D. PDRS.1431/03.64.00/2006-2007
October    5, 2006
Operational    Guidelines for Banks
undertaking/proposing to undertake
Primary Dealer Business
16.
RBI/2006-2007/113    DBOD.No.BP.BC.27/21.01.002/2006-07
August    23, 2006
Prudential    guidelines - Banks’ investment in Venture Capital Funds (VCFs)
17.
RBI/2006-07/104    DBOD.FSD.BC.No.25/24.92.001/2006-07
August 9,
2006
Guidelines for    banks undertaking PD business
18.
RBI    2005-06/308 DBOD.FSD.BC.No.64/24.92.001/2005-06
February    27, 2006
Guidelines for    banks undertaking PD Business
19.
RBI/2004/260    DBOD.BP.BC.No.100/21.03.054/2003-04
June 21,
2004
Annual    Policy Statement for the year 2004-05 - Prudential
Credit Exposure    Limits by Banks
20.
DBOD.FSC.BC.27/24.01.018/    2003-2004
September
22, 2003
Entry    of banks into insurance
business
21.
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.66/24.01.002/2002-03
January 31, 2003
Public    issue of shares and Debentures- Underwriting by Merchant Banking subsidiaries    of Commercial Banks
22.
DBOD.FSC.BC/16/24.01.018/ 2000-2001
August 9,
2000
Entry of banks into Insurance
business
23.
DBOD.FSC.BC.145/24.01.013-2000
March 7,
2000
Guidelines relating    to Money Market Mutual Funds (MMMFs)
24.
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.120/24.01.013/99-2000
November 2, 1999
‘Cheque writing’    facility for investors of Gilt Funds and Liquid Income Schemes
25.
DBOD.No.FSC.99/24.01.013/99-2000
October 9, 1999
‘Cheque writing’    facility for investors of Money Market Mutual Funds (MMMFs)
26.
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.70/24.01.001/99
July 17, 1999
Equipment Leasing    Activity –Accounting/ Provisioning Norms
27.
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.65/24.01.001-99
July 1, 1999
Participation in    the share capital of financial services companies
28.
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.42/24.01.013-99
April 29, 1999
‘Cheque writing’    facility for investors of Money Market Mutual Funds (MMMFs)
29.
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.118/24.76.002/98
December 26, 1998
Information System    for Portfolio Management Services (PMS)
30.
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.129/24.76.002/97
October 22, 1997
Retailing of    Government Securities
31.
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.90/24.01.001/97-98
August 13, 1997
Equipment Leasing,    Hire Purchase, Factoring, etc. Activities
32.
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.74/24.76.002/95-96
June 13, 1996
Marketing of Mutual    Fund Units by banks
33.
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.129/24.76.002/97
June 8, 1996
Retailing of    Government Securities
34
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.101/24.01.001/95
September 20, 1995
Equipment Leasing,    Hire Purchase, Factoring, etc. Activities
35.
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.86/24.01.001/95-96
August 17, 1995
Commitments in    respect of underwriting, etc -Obligations
36.
DBOD.No.BC.73/27.07.001/94-95
June 7, 1994
Acceptance of    deposits under Portfolio Management Scheme (PMS)
37.
IECD.No.44/08.12.01/94-95
April 27, 1995
Factoring    Services-Role of Banks-Clarifications
38.
DBOD.No.BC.69/24.01.003/94
May 21, 1994
Guidelines for    undertaking Mutual Fund business by banks
39.
DBOD.No.BC.18/24.01.001/93-94
February 19, 1994
Equipment Leasing,    Hire Purchase, Factoring, etc. Activities
40.
DBOD.No.Dir.BC.4/13.07.05/94
January 25, 1994
Investments in and    underwriting of bonds issued by Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs)
41.
DBOD.No.BC.183/27.07.003/93-94
October 18, 1993
Information System    for Portfolio Management Services (PMS)
42.
DBOD.No.BC.176/13.07.05/93
October 11, 1993
Investments in and    underwriting of bonds issued by Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs)
43.
DBOD.No.BC.145/13.07.05/93
July 30, 1993
Underwriting    Activity –Devolvement on Underwriters
44.
DBOD.No.BC.94/24.01.001/92-93
March 19, 1993
Monitoring the    activities of subsidiaries/ Mutual Funds
45.
DBOD.No.BC.11/24.01.009/92-93
July 30, 1992
Portfolio    Management on behalf of banks
46.
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.45/C.469-91/92
October 15, 1991
Participation in    the share capital of Finance Services Companies/ taking membership of OC    Exchange of India
47.
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.130/C.469-90/91
May 30, 1991
Conduct of Leasing    Business by Commercial Banks- Clarification
48.
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.69/469-90/91
January 18, 1991
Portfolio    Management on behalf of clients
49.
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.14/C.469-90/91
September 7, 1990
Hire-Purchase    business by banks
50.
IECD.No.PMD.1/50/90-91
July 2, 1990
Guidelines for    provision of Factoring Services
51.
DBOD.No.Dir.BC.103/C.347(PSB)-89
April 3, 1989
Investments in and    underwriting of bonds issued by Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs)
52.
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.27/C.469-89
September 29, 1989
‘Safety Net’    Schemes for public issues of shares, debentures, etc.
53.
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.26/C.469-89
September 29, 1989
Commitments in    respect of public issue of shares, debentures, etc.
54.
DBOD.BP(FSC)1854/C-469-89
May 27, 1989
Approval for    setting up of subsidiaries, etc.
55.
DBOD.No.BP.(FSC)BC.120/C.469-89
May 2, 1989
Portfolio    Management on behalf of clients
56.
DBOD.No.GC.BC-55/C.408C(P)-87
May 28, 1987
Investments in and    underwriting of bonds issued by public sector undertakings
57.
DBOD.No.Dir.BC.43/C.347-87
April 15, 1987
Portfolio    Management on behalf of clients
58.
DBOD.No.BP.BC.138/C.469(W)-86
December 17, 1986
Setting up of    subsidiaries by banks
59.
DBOD.No.GC.BC.131/C.408C(P)/86
November 25, 1986
Investments in    Shares and Debentures
60.
IECD.No.CAD.92/C.446(LF)-84
August 18, 1984
Equipment    Leasing-Guidelines to banks