(269 kb)
RRBs - Master Circular on Priority Sector Lending
RBI/2014-15/82
RPCD.CO.RRB.BC.No.5/03.05.33/2014-15
July 1, 2014
The  Chairman
Regional Rural Banks
Dear Sir,
Master Circular –  Lending to Priority Sector
The Reserve Bank of India has, from  time to time, issued a number of guidelines / instructions / directives to  banks on lending to Priority Sector. In order to enable the banks to have  current instructions at one place, a Master Circular incorporating the existing  guidelines / instructions / directives on the subject has been prepared and  enclosed. This
Master Circular
consolidates all the circulars clarifications issued by Reserve Bank on the  subject up to June 30, 2014, as indicated in the
Appendix
.
2.  Please acknowledge receipt of this circular to our Regional Office.
Yours  faithfully,
(A.Udgata)
Principal Chief General Manager
Lending To Priority Sector ‐ Background
At a  meeting of the National Credit Council held in July 1968, it was emphasised  that commercial banks should increase their involvement in the financing of  priority sectors, viz., agriculture and small scale industries. The description  of the priority sectors was later formalised in 1972 on the basis of the report  submitted by the Informal Study Group on Statistics relating to advances to the  Priority Sectors constituted by the Reserve Bank in May 1971. On the basis of  this report, the Reserve Bank prescribed for commercial banks a modified return  for reporting priority sector advances and certain guidelines were issued in  this connection indicating the scope of the items to be included under the  various categories of priority sector. Although initially there was no specific  target fixed in respect of priority sector lending, in November 1974 the  commercial banks were advised to raise the share of these sectors in their  aggregate advances to the level of 33 1/3 per cent by March 1979.
At a  meeting of the Union Finance Minister with the Chief Executive Officers of  public sector banks held in March 1980, it was agreed that banks should aim at  raising the proportion of their advances to priority sector to 40 per cent by  March 1985. Subsequently, on the basis of the recommendations of the Working Group  on the Modalities of Implementation of Priority Sector Lending and the Twenty  Point Economic Programme by Banks (Chairman: Dr. K. S. Krishnaswamy), all  commercial banks were advised to achieve the target of priority sector lending  at 40 per cent of aggregate bank advances by 1985. Sub‐targets were also specified for lending  to agriculture and the weaker sections within the priority sector. Since then,  there have been several changes in the scope of priority sector lending and the  targets and sub‐targets  applicable to various bank groups.
Regional  Rural Banks (RRBs)
RRBs  were originally allowed to lend only to the Target Group comprising small and  marginal farmers, landless labourers, rural artisans and other weaker sections  of society. Subsequently, they were allowed to lend up to 60 per cent of their  incremental lending during a year to Non‐Target  Group borrowers. After a review, it was decided that from the financial year  beginning April 1, 1997, the advances of RRBs to Priority Sector borrowers were  to constitute 40 per cent of their outstanding advances, as in the case of  commercial banks. Within the overall target of 40 per cent, the advances  granted to weaker sections of society were to constitute 25 per cent of the  Priority Sector advances (i.e. 10 per cent of total outstanding advances).
The  levels of achievements vis‐à‐vis the prescribed targets as above for  lending to priority sector by RRBs were reviewed in the meeting with the  Estimate Committee of Parliament held on August 6, 2002. With a view to  providing more credit to the segments under priority sector, it was decided  that RRBs should achieve a target of 60 per cent of their outstanding advances  for priority sector lending as against 40 per cent. Further, of the total  priority sector advances, at least 25 percent (i.e. 15 percent of the total  advances) were required to be advanced to weaker sections of the society. The  revised targets were made effective from the year 2003‐04.
Internal  Working Group on Priority Sector Lending
On  the basis of the recommendations made in September 2005 by the Internal Working  Group (Chairman: Shri C. S. Murthy), set up in Reserve Bank to examine, review  and recommend changes, if any, in the existing policy on priority sector  lending including the segments constituting the priority sector, targets and  sub‐targets, etc. and the comments/suggestions  received thereon from banks, financial institutions, public and the Indian  Banks’ Association (IBA), it has been decided to include only those sectors as  part of the priority sector, that impact large sections of the population, the  weaker sections and the sectors which are employment‐intensive such as agriculture, and tiny  and small enterprises.
Accordingly,  the broad categories of priority sector for RRBs will be as under:
I. CATEGORIES OF PRIORITY SECTOR
(i)  Agriculture (Direct and Indirect finance):
Direct finance to  agriculture shall include short, medium and long term loans given for  agriculture and allied activities (dairy, fishery, piggery, poultry,  beekeeping, etc.) directly to individual farmers, Self‐Help Groups (SHGs) or Joint Liability  Groups (JLGs) of individual farmers without limit and to others (such as  corporates, partnership firms and institutions) up to the limits indicated in  Section I, for taking up agriculture/allied activities.
Indirect  finance to agriculture shall include loans given for agriculture and allied  activities as specified in Section I, appended.
(ii) Micro and Small  Enterprises (Direct and Indirect Finance):
Direct finance to  micro and small enterprises shall include all loans given to micro and small  (manufacturing) enterprises engaged in manufacture / production, processing or  preservation of goods, and micro and small (service) enterprises engaged in  providing or rendering of services, and whose investment in plant and machinery  and equipment (original cost excluding land and building and such items as  mentioned therein) respectively, does not exceed the amounts specified in  Section I. The micro and small (service) enterprises shall include small road  & water transport operators, small business, professional & self‐employed persons, retail trade i.e.  advances granted to retail traders dealing in essential commodities (fair price  shops), consumer co‐operative  stores and advances granted to private retail traders with credit limits not  exceeding Rs.20 lakh and all other service enterprises, as per the definition  given in section I appended.
Indirect  finance to small enterprises shall include finance to any person providing  inputs to or marketing the output of artisans, village and cottage industries,  handlooms and to cooperatives of producers in this sector.
(iii)  Micro Credit:
Provision of credit and other financial  services and products of very small amounts not exceeding Rs. 50,000 per  borrower, either directly or indirectly through a SHG/JLG mechanism will constitute  micro credit.
(iv) Education loans:
Educational  loans include loans and advances granted to individuals for educational  purposes up to Rs.10 lakh for studies in India and Rs.20 lakh for studies  abroad, and do not include those granted to institutions. Loans granted to  educational institutions will be eligible to be classified as priority sector  advances under micro and small (service) enterprises, provided they satisfy the  provisions of MSMED Act, 2006 .
(v) Housing  loans:
Loans up to Rs. 25 lakh to individuals for purchase/ construction of  dwelling unit per family, (excluding loans granted by banks to their own  employees) and loans given for repairs to the damaged dwelling units of  families up to Rs. 1 lakh in rural and semi‐urban  areas and up to Rs. 2 lakh in urban and metropolitan areas.
II.  OTHER IMPORTANT FEATURES OF THE GUIDELINES
(i)
Investments  by banks in securitised assets, representing loans to various categories of  priority sector, shall be eligible for classification under respective categories  of priority sector (direct or indirect) depending on the underlying assets,  provided the securitised assets are originated by banks and financial  institutions and fulfil the Reserve Bank of India guidelines on securitisation.  This would mean that the banks' investments in the above categories of  securitised assets shall be eligible for classification under the respective  categories of priority sector only if the securitised advances were eligible to  be classified as priority sector advances before their securitisation.
(ii)
Outright  purchases of any loan asset eligible to be categorised under priority sector,  shall be eligible for classification under the respective categories of  priority sector (direct or indirect), provided the loans purchased are eligible  to be categorized under priority sector; the loan assets are purchased (after  due diligence and at fair value) from banks and financial institutions, without  any recourse to the seller; and the eligible loan assets are not disposed of,  other than by way of repayment, within a period of six months from the date of  purchase.
(iii)
RRBs can sell their loan assets held by them under priority sector categories  in excess of the prescribed priority sector lending target of 60 per cent.
(iv)
RRBs can issue Inter‐Bank  Participation Certificates (IBPC) of a tenor of 180 days on risk sharing basis  to scheduled commercial banks against their priority sector advances in excess  of 60% of their outstanding advances.
III.TARGETS/SUB‐TARGETS
As  at present, RRBs will have a target of 60 per cent of their outstanding  advances for priority sector lending. Further, of the total priority sector  advances, at least 25 percent (i.e. 15 percent of the total advances) should be  advanced to weaker sections of the society.
The  detailed guidelines for RRBs in this regard are given hereunder:
SECTION  I
1. AGRICULTURE
DIRECT FINANCE
1.1 Finance  to individual farmers [including Self Help Groups (SHGs) or Joint Liability  Groups (JLGs), i.e. groups of individual farmers, provided banks maintain  disaggregated data on such finance] for Agriculture and Allied Activities  (dairy, fishery, piggery, poultry, bee‐keeping, etc.)
1.1.1
Short‐term loans for raising crops, i.e. for  crop loans. This will include traditional/non‐traditional  plantations and horticulture.
1.1.2
Advances  up to Rs. 10 lakh against pledge/hypothecation of agricultural produce  (including warehouse receipts) for a period not exceeding 12 months,  irrespective of whether the farmers were given crop loans for raising the  produce or not.
1.1.3
Working  capital and term loans including credit sanctioned under Kisan Credit Card for  financing production and investment requirements for agriculture and allied  activities.
1.1.4
Loans  to small and marginal farmers for purchase of land for agricultural purposes.
1.1.5
Loans  to distressed farmers indebted to non‐institutional  lenders, against appropriate collateral or group security.
1.1.6
Loans  granted for pre harvest  and post harvest activities such as spraying, weeding, harvesting, grading,  sorting, processing and transporting undertaken by individuals, SHGs and  cooperatives in rural areas.
1.1.7
Loans  granted for agricultural and allied activities, irrespective of whether the  borrowing entity is engaged in export or otherwise. The export credit granted  by RRBs for agricultural and allied activities may, however, be reported  separately under heading "Export credit to agricultural sector".
1.2 Finance to others [such as corporates, partnership firms and institutions] for  Agriculture and Allied Activities (dairy, fishery, piggery, poultry, bee‐keeping, etc.)
1.2.1
Loans  granted for pre harvest  and post harvest activities such as spraying, weeding, harvesting, grading,  sorting and transporting.
1.2.2
Finance  up to an aggregate amount of Rs. one crore per borrower for the purposes listed  at 1.1.1, 1.1.2, 1.1.3 and 1.2.1 above.
1.2.3
One‐third of loans in excess of Rs. one  crore in aggregate per borrower for agriculture and allied activities.
INDIRECT FINANCE
1.3  Finance for Agriculture and Allied Activities
1.3.1
Two‐third of loans to entities covered under  1.2 above in excess of Rs. one crore in aggregate per borrower for agriculture  and allied activities.
1.3.2
Loans  to food and agro‐based  processing units with investments in plant and machinery up to Rs. 10 crore,  undertaken by those other than 1.1.6 above. Credit under the dairy segment  which may primarily benefit small/marginal farmers and tiny units and may  contribute to the development of dairy business.
1.3.3
(i)  Credit for purchase and distribution of fertilisers, pesticides, seeds, etc.
(ii)  Loans up to Rs. 40 lakh granted for purchase and distribution of inputs for the  allied activities such as cattle feed, poultry feed, etc.
1.3.4
Finance  for setting up of Agriclinics and Agribusiness Centres.
1.3.5
Finance  for hire‐purchase schemes for distribution of  agricultural machinery and implements.
1.3.6
Loans  to farmers through Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS), Farmers’  Service Societies (FSS) and Large‐sized  Adivasi Multi Purpose Societies (LAMPS).
1.3.7
Loans  to cooperative societies of farmers for disposing of the produce of members.
1.3.8
Financing  the farmers indirectly through the co‐operative  system (otherwise than by subscription to bonds and debenture issues).
1.3.9
Loans  for construction and running of storage facilities (warehouse, market yards,  godowns, and silos), including cold storage units designed to store agriculture  produce/products, irrespective of their location. If the storage unit is  registered as micro or small enterprise, the loans granted to such units may be  classified under advances to Micro and Small Enterprises sector.
1.3.10
Advances  to Custom Service Units managed by individuals, institutions or organisations  who maintain a fleet of tractors, bulldozers, well‐boring equipment, threshers, combines,  etc., and undertake work for farmers on contract basis.
1.3.11
Finance  extended to dealers in drip irrigation/sprinkler irrigation system/  agricultural machinery, irrespective of their location, subject to the following  conditions:
(a)  The dealer should be dealing exclusively in such items or if dealing in other  products, should be maintaining separate and distinct records in respect of  such items.
(b)  A ceiling of up to Rs. 30 lakh per dealer should be observed.
1.3.12
Loans  to
Arthias
(commission agents in rural/semi‐urban areas functioning in markets/
mandies
)  for extending credit to farmers, for supply of inputs as also for buying the  output from the individual farmers/ SHGs/ JLGs.
1.3.13
Credit  outstanding under loans for general purposes under General Credit Cards (GCC).
1.3.14
Loans  granted to NGOs/MFIs for on‐lending  to individual farmers or their SHGs/JLGs.
1.3.15
Overdrafts,  up to Rs.25,000 (per account), granted against 'no‐frills' accounts in rural and semi‐urban areas.
1.4 Loans not  eligible for Classification as Direct / Indirect finance to Agriculture
1.4.1
Loans  sanctioned to NBFCs for on‐lending to individuals  or other entities against gold jewellery, investments made by banks in  securitised assets originated by NBFCs, where the underlying assets are loans  against gold jewellery, and purchase / assignment of gold loan portfolio from  NBFCs.
2 MICRO and SMALL  ENTERPRISES
DIRECT  FINANCE
2.1.1 Manufacturing  Enterprises
(a) Micro  (manufacturing) Enterprises
Enterprises  engaged in the manufacture / production, processing or preservation of goods  and whose investment in plant and machinery [original cost excluding land and  building and the items specified by the Ministry of Small Scale Industries vide  its notification no. S.O.1722(E) dated October 5, 2006] does not exceed Rs.25  lakh, irrespective of the location of the unit.
(b) Small (manufacturing) Enterprises
Enterprises engaged  in the manufacture / production, processing or preservation of goods and whose  investment in plant and machinery [original cost excluding land and building  and such items as in 2.1.1 (a)] is more than Rs.25 lakh but does not exceed  Rs.5 crore, irrespective of the location of the unit.
2.1.2 Service  Enterprises
(a) Micro (service) Enterprises
Enterprises engaged  in providing / rendering of services and whose investment in equipment  (original cost excluding land and building and furniture, fittings and other  items not directly related to the service rendered or as may be notified under  the MSMED Act, 2006 does not exceed Rs.10 lakh, irrespective of the location of  the unit.
(b) Small (service) Enterprises
Enterprises engaged  in providing / rendering of services and whose investment in equipment  [original cost excluding land and building and furniture, fittings and such items  as in 2.1.2 (a)] is more than Rs.10 lakh but does not exceed Rs.2 crore,  irrespective of the location of the unit.
(c)
The  small and micro (service) enterprises shall include small road & water  transport operators, small business, professional & self‐employed persons, and other service  enterprises engaged in activities, viz, consultancy services including  management services, composite broker services in risk and insurance  management, Third Party Administration (TPA) services for medical insurance claims  of policy holders, seed grading services, training‐cum‐incubator  centre, educational institutions, training institutes, retail trade, practice  of law i.e. legal services, trading in medical instruments (brand new),  placement and management consultancy services, advertising agency and training  centres, etc. and which satisfy the definition of micro and small (service)  enterprises in respect of investment in equipment (original cost excluding land  and building and furniture, fittings and other items not directly related to  the services rendered or as may be notified under the MSMED Act, 2006) (i.e.  not exceeding Rs.10 lakh and Rs.2 crore respectively).
(d)
Loans  granted by RRBs to micro and small enterprises (MSE) (manufacturing and  services) are eligible for classification under priority sector, provided such  enterprises satisfy the definition of MSE sector as contained in MSMED Act,  2006, irrespective of whether the borrowing entity is engaged in export or  otherwise. The export credit granted by banks to MSEs may, however, be reported  separately under heading "Export credit to micro and small enterprises  sector".
2.1.3 Khadi and  Village Industries Sector (KVI)
All advances granted  to units in the KVI sector, irrespective of their size of operations, location  and amount of original investment in plant and machinery.
INDIRECT FINANCE
2.2
Indirect  finance to the micro and small (manufacturing as well as service) enterprises  sector will include credit to :
2.2.1
Persons  involved in assisting the decentralised sector in the supply of inputs to and  marketing of outputs of artisans, village and cottage industries.
2.2.2
Advances  to cooperatives of producers in the decentralised sector viz. artisans village  and cottage industries.
3.  MICRO CREDIT
3.1
Loans  of very small amount not exceeding Rs. 50,000 per borrower provided by banks  either directly or indirectly through a SHG/JLG mechanism.
3.2
Loans  to distressed persons (other than farmers) to prepay their debt to  noninstitutional lenders, against appropriate collateral or group security,  would be eligible for classification under priority sector.
4.  EDUCATION LOANS
4.1
Loans  granted to individuals for educational purposes up to Rs.10 lakh for studies in  India  and Rs.20 lakh for studies abroad. Loans granted to educational institutions  will be eligible to be classified as priority sector advances under micro and  small (service) enterprises, provided they satisfy the provisions of MSMED Act  2006.
5. HOUSING LOANS
5.1
Loans  up to Rs.25 lakh, irrespective of location, to individuals for purchase /  construction of a dwelling unit per family, excluding loans granted by banks to  their own employees.
5.2
Loans  given for repairs to the damaged dwelling units of families up to Rs.1 lakh in  rural and semi‐urban  areas and up to Rs.2 lakh in urban and metropolitan areas.
5.3
Assistance  given to any governmental agency for construction of dwelling units or for slum  clearance and rehabilitation of slum dwellers, subject to a ceiling of Rs.5  lakh of loan amount per dwelling unit.
5.4
Assistance  given to a non‐governmental  agency approved by the NHB for the purpose of refinance for construction /  reconstruction of dwelling units or for slum clearance and rehabilitation of  slum dwellers, subject to a ceiling of loan component of Rs.10 lakh per  dwelling unit.
6.  STATE SPONSORED ORGANIZATIONS FOR SCHEDULED CASTES/ SCHEDULED TRIBES
Advances  sanctioned to State Sponsored Organisations for Scheduled Castes/ Scheduled  Tribes for the specific purpose of purchase and supply of inputs to and/or the  marketing of the outputs of the beneficiaries of these organisations.
7. WEAKER  SECTIONS
The  weaker sections under priority sector shall include the following:
(a) Small  and marginal farmers with land holding of 5 acres and less, and landless  labourers, tenant farmers and share croppers;
(b)  Artisans, village and cottage industries where individual credit limits do not  exceed Rs. 50,000;
(c)  Beneficiaries of Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY) now National Rural  Livelihood Mission  (NRLM) .
(d)  Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes;
(e)  Beneficiaries of Differential Rate of Interest (DRI) scheme;
(f)  Beneficiaries under Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY);
(g)  Beneficiaries under the Scheme for Rehabilitation of Manual Scavengers (SRMS);
(h)  Advances to Self Help Groups;
(i)  Loans to distressed poor to prepay their debt to informal sector, against  appropriate collateral or group security.
(j)  Loans granted under (a) to (i) above to persons from minority communities as  may be notified by Government of India from time to time.
In  States, where one of the minority communities notified is, in fact, in  majority, item (j) will cover only the other notified minorities. These  States/Union Territories are Jammu & Kashmir, Punjab, Meghalaya, Mizoram,  Nagaland and Lakshadweep.
SECTION  II
Common Guidelines for  Priority Sector Advances
1.
RRBs  should follow the following common guidelines prescribed by the Reserve Bank  for all categories of advances under the priority sector.
2. Processing of  Applications
2.1 Completion of  Application Forms
In case of Government  sponsored schemes such as NRLM, the concerned project authorities like DRDAs,  DICs, etc. should arrange for completion of application forms received from  borrowers. In other areas, the bank staff should help the borrowers for this  purpose.
2.2 Issue of  Acknowledgement of Loan Applications
RRBs should give  acknowledgement for loan applications received from weaker sections. Towards  this purpose, it may be ensured that all loan application forms have perforated  portion for acknowledgement to be completed and issued by the receiving branch.  Each branch may affix on the main application form as well as the corresponding  portion for acknowledgement, a running serial number. While using the existing  stock of application forms which do not have a perforated portion for  acknowledgement separately given, care should be taken to ensure that the  serial number given on the acknowledgement is also recorded on the main  application. The loan applications should have a check list of documents  required for guidance of the prospective borrowers.
2.3 Disposal of  Applications
(i) All loan  applications up to a credit limit of Rs.25,000 should be disposed of within a  fortnight and those for over Rs.25,000, within 8 to 9 weeks.
(ii) All loan  applications for Micro and Small Enterprises up to a credit limit of Rs.25,000  should be disposed of within 2 weeks and those up to Rs.5 lakh within 4 weeks,  provided the loan applications are complete in all respects and are accompanied  by a 'check list'.
2.4 Rejection of Proposals
Branch Managers may  reject applications (except in respect of SC/ST) provided the cases of  rejection are verified subsequently by the Divisional / Regional Managers. In  the case of proposals from SC/ST, rejection should be at a level higher than  that of Branch Manager.
2.5 Register of Rejected Applications
A register should be maintained at the branch,  wherein the date of receipt, sanction / rejection / disbursement  with reasons therefor, etc., should be recorded. The register should be made available  to all inspecting agencies.
3. Mode of  Disbursement of Loan
With a view to  providing farmers wider choice as also eliminating undesirable practices, banks  may disburse all loans for agricultural purposes in cash which will facilitate  dealer choice to borrowers and foster an environment of trust. However, banks  may continue the practice of obtaining receipts from borrowers.
4. Repayment Schedule
4.1
Repayment  programme should be fixed taking into account the sustenance requirements,  surplus generating capacity, the break‐even  point, the life of the asset, etc., and not in an "ad hoc" manner. In  respect of composite loans, repayment schedule may be fixed for term loan  component only.
4.2
As  the repaying capacity of the people affected by natural calamities gets  severely impaired due to the damage to the economic pursuits and loss of  economic assets, the benefits such as restructuring of existing loans, etc. as per  NABARD's instructions may be extended to the affected borrowers.
5. Rates of Interest
5.1
The  rates of interest on various categories of priority sector advances will be as  per RBI directives issued from time to time.
5.2
(a)  In respect of direct agricultural advances, banks should not compound the  interest in the case of current dues, i.e. crop loans and instalments not  fallen due in respect of term loans, as the agriculturists do not have any  regular source of income other than sale proceeds of their crops.
(b) When crop loans  or instalments under term loans become overdue, banks can add interest to the  principal.
(c) Where the default  is due to genuine reasons banks should extend the period of loan or  reschedule the instalments under term loan.  Once such a relief has been extended, the overdues become current dues and  banks should not compound interest.
(d) Banks should  charge interest on agricultural advances in respect of long duration crops, at  annual rests instead of quarterly or longer rests, and could compound the  interest, if the loan / instalment becomes overdue.
6. Penal Interest
6.1
The  issue of charging penal interests that should be levied for reasons such as  default in repayment, non‐submission  of financial statements, etc. has been left to the Board of each bank. Banks  have been advised to formulate policy for charging such penal interest with the  approval of their Boards, to be governed by well accepted principles of  transparency, fairness, incentive to service the debt and due regard to  difficulties of customers.
6.2
No penal interest should be  charged by banks for loans under priority sector upto Rs.25,000 as hitherto.  However, banks will be free to levy penal interest for loans exceeding  Rs.25,000 in terms of the above guidelines.
7. Service Charges / Inspection Charges
7.1
No service charges / inspection charges  should be levied on priority sector loans up to Rs.25,000.
7.2
For  loans above Rs.25,000/‐banks  will be free to prescribe service charges with the prior approval of their  Boards, in terms of circular No.DBOD.Dir.BC.86/03.01.00/99‐2000 dated September 7, 1999.
8. Insurance against Fire and Other Risks
8.1
RRBs  may waive insurance of assets financed by bank credit in the following cases :
No.
Category
Type    of Risk
Type    of Assets
(a)
All categories of    priority sector advances up to and inclusive of Rs.10,000
Fire & other    risks
Equipment and    current assets
(b)
Advances to Micro and    Small Enterprises up to and inclusive of Rs.25,000 by way of ‐
*
Composite loans to    artisans, village and cottage industries
Fire
Equipment and    current assets
*
All term loans
Fire
Equipment
*
Working capital    where these are against non-hazardous goods
Fire
Equipment
8.2
Where, however, insurance of vehicle or machinery or other  equipment / assets is compulsory under the provisions of any law or where such  a requirement is stipulated in the refinance scheme of any refinancing agency  or as part of a Government‐sponsored  programmes such as NRLM, insurance should not be waived even if the  relative credit facility does not exceed Rs.10,000/‐ or Rs.25,000/‐ as the  case may be.
9. Photographs of Borrowers
While there is no objection to taking  photographs of the borrowers for purposes of identification, banks themselves  should make arrangements for the photographs and also bear the cost of  photographs of borrowers falling in the category of Weaker Sections. It should  also be ensured that the procedure does not involve any delay in loan  disbursement.
10. Discretionary Powers
All Branch Managers of RRBs should be vested  with discretionary powers to sanction proposals from weaker sections without  reference to any higher authority. If there are difficulties in extending such  discretionary powers to all the Branch Managers, such powers should exist at  least at the district level and arrangements be ensured that credit proposals  on weaker sections are cleared promptly.
11. Machinery to look into  Complaints
11.1
There should be machinery at the regional  offices to entertain complaints from the borrowers if the branches do not  follow these guidelines, and to verify periodically that these guidelines are  scrupulously implemented by the branches.
11.2
The names and addresses of the officer  with whom complaints can be lodged should be displayed on the notice board of  every branch.
12. Amendments
These guidelines are subject to any instructions  that may be issued by the RBI from time to time.
Appendix
List  of circulars consolidated by the Master Circular
No
Circular No.
Date
Subject
1
RBI/2012-13/85 RPCD.CO.RRB.BC.No.6/03.05.33/2012-13
2.07.2012
Master Circular on Lending to Priority Sector
2
RPCD.CO.RRB.BC.No.74/03.05.33    2011‐12
27.04.2012
Priority sector lending‐indirect finance to Housing sector
3
RPCD.CO.RRB.BC.No.24/03.05.33    2011‐12
18.10.2011
Inclusion of Credit under KCC under direct finance for    Agriculture
4
RPCD.CO.RRB.BC.No.71/03.05.33    2010‐11
16.05.11
Increase in Housing Loan Limit under Priority Sector
5
RPCD.CO.RRB.BC.No.82/03.05.33    2009-10
11.05.10
Priority Sector Lending
Export Credit for    Agriculture and Allied Activities
6
RPCD.CO.RRB.BC.No.76/03.05.33    2009-10
21.04.10
Priority Sector Lending –
Advances to Micro and    Small Enterprises engaged in Exports
7
RPCD.CO.RRB.BC.No.29/03.05.33    2009-10
06.10.09
Priority Sector Lending –
Categorisation of    Activities under Service under the MSMED Act,2006
8
RPCD.CO.RRB.BC.No.13/03.05.33    2009-10
04.8.09
Inter-Bank Participations
9
RPCD.CO.RRB.BC.No.33/03.05.33    2007-08
22.5.08
Increasing    Opportunities for Flow of Credit to Priority Sector
10
RPCD.CO.Plan.BC.No.66/04.09.01    2007-08
06.5.08
General Purpose Credit    Cards and Overdrafts against 'No Frills' Account as Indirect Finance to    Agriculture under Priority Sector
Appendix
List of circulars consolidated by the Master Circular No.
Circular No.
Date
Subject
Paragraph No.
Gist of    instructions
1
RPCD.CO.RRB.BC. No.74/03.05.33 2011‐12
27.04.2012
Priority sector lending‐indirect finance to Housing sector
6.4
Increase in limit from Rs. 5 lakh to Rs. 10 lakh for the bank    loans extended to non‐governmental agencies, approved by NHB for their    refinance, for on‐lending for the purpose of construction/reconstruction of    individual dwelling units or for slum clearance and rehabilitation of slum    dwellers.
2
RPCD.CO.RRB.BC. No.24/03.05.33 2011‐12
18.10.2011
Inclusion of Credit under KCC under direct finance for    Agriculture
1.4.1
Credit under Kisan Credit card is to be treated as direct    finance for agriculture under priority sector.
3
RPCD.CO.RRB.BC. No.71/03.05.33 2010‐11
16.05.11
Increase in Housing Loan Limit under Priority Sector
I.V, 6.1
Housing loan limits increased from Rs. 20 lakh to Rs. 25 lakh