(73 kb)
Notification as Amended upto June 30, 2014 'Mortgage Guarantee Companies Investment (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2008'
RBI/2014-15/48
DNBS.(PD-MGC).C.C.No.18/23.11.001/2014-15
July  1, 2014
To,
The  Chairman / CEOs of
All Mortgage Guarantee Companies
Dear Sir,
Notification  as Amended upto June 30, 2014
'Mortgage Guarantee Companies Investment (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2008'
As you are aware,  in order to have all current instructions on the subject at one place, the  Reserve Bank of India issues
updated circulars / notifications
. The  instructions contained in the notification  No.DNBS(MGC)5/CGM (PK)-2008 dated February 15, 2008 updated as on June 30, 2014 are reproduced below. The  updated Notification has also been placed on the RBI web-site (
http://www.rbi.org.in
).
Yours faithfully,
(K.K. Vohra)
Principal Chief General Manager
Table of Contents
Para No.
Particulars
1
Short title, commencement and applicability of    the directions
2
Definitions
3
Investment Policy for    Mortgage Guarantee Companies
4
Pattern of Investment
5
Income Recognition
6
Accounting of    Investments
Reserve  Bank of India
Department of Non-Banking Supervision
Central Office,
Centre I, World Trade Centre
Cuffe Parade, Colaba
Mumbai - 400 005
Notification DNBS(PD)MGC  No.5/CGM(PK)-2008 February 15, 2008
The Reserve Bank of India, having considered it  necessary in the public interest, and being satisfied that, for the purpose of  enabling the Bank to regulate the credit system to the advantage of the  country, it is necessary to issue the directions relating to the prudential  norms as set out below, in exercise of the powers conferred by Section 45JA of  the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934) and of all the powers enabling  it in this behalf, gives to every Mortgage Guarantee Company the directions  hereinafter specified.
Short title, commencement and applicability of the directions :
1. (i) These directions shall be known as the "Mortgage  Guarantee Companies Investment (Reserve Bank)  Directions, 2008".
(ii) These directions shall  come into force with immediate effect.
(iii) The provisions of these  directions shall apply to every Mortgage Guarantee Company which has been  granted Certificate of Registration by the Reserve Bank of India.
Definitions
2. (1) For the purpose of these directions, unless the context  otherwise requires :
(i) "break up  value" means the equity capital and reserves as reduced by intangible  assets and revaluation reserves, divided by the number of equity shares of the  investee company;
(ii) "carrying  cost" means book value of the assets and interest accrued thereon but not  received;
(iii) "earning  value" means the value of an equity share computed by taking the average  of profits after tax as reduced by the preference dividend and adjusted for  extra-ordinary and non-recurring items, for the immediately preceding three  years and further divided by the number of equity shares of the investee  company and capitalised at the following rate :
(a) in case of predominantly  manufacturing company, eight per cent;
(b) in case of predominantly  trading company, ten per cent; and
(c) in case of any other company,  including a non-banking financial company, twelve per cent;
Note :
If, an investee  company is a loss making company, the earning value will be taken at zero;
(iv) "fair value" means the mean of  the earning value and the break up value;
(v) "Mortgage Guarantee  Company" means a company registered with the Bank as mortgage guarantee  company as defined in "Mortgage Guarantee Companies Prudential Norms  (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2008;
(vi) "net asset  value" means the latest declared net asset value by the mutual fund  concerned in respect of that particular scheme;
(vii) 'non-performing asset'  (NPA) for the purpose of income recognition on investments by mortgage  guarantee companies means an asset, in respect of which, interest or principal  or amortization obligations have remained overdue for a period of 90 days or  more.
(2) Other words or  expressions used but not defined herein and defined in the Reserve Bank of  India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934) or Mortgage Guarantee Company Prudential Norms  (Reserve Bank) Guidelines, 2008 contained in Prudential Norms (MGC) No.
DNBS.(PD)MGC 4/CGM (PK)-2008 dated February 15, 2008
,  shall have the same meaning as assigned to them under that Act or that  Directions. Any other words or expressions not defined in that Act or that Directions,  shall have the same meaning assigned to them in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of  1956).
Investment Policy for Mortgage Guarantee Companies
3. (i) A mortgage guarantee company shall invest only in the  following instruments :
a) Government Securities;
b) Securities of corporate bodies / public  sector undertakings guaranteed by Government;
c) Fixed Deposit / Certificate of Deposits /  bonds of Scheduled Commercial banks / PFIs;
d) listed and rated debentures / bonds of  corporates;
e) fully debt oriented Mutual Fund Units;
f) unquoted Government securities and Government  guaranteed bonds.
(ii) No other investment  including investment in subsidiaries and joint ventures would be permitted.  However, a mortgage guarantee company may hold investments in equity shares of  any company which may be quoted or unquoted or other unquoted investments  acquired in satisfaction of its debts which shall be disposed of by the  mortgage guarantee company within a period of three years or within such period  as extended by the Bank, from the date of such acquisition.
Pattern of Investment
4. (i) A mortgage guarantee company  shall hold not less than 25% of its total investment portfolio in Central and  State Government securities.
(ii) The remaining  investments may be invested as the Board considers prudent, but with a ceiling  of 25% in any one category i.e. listed and rated corporate bonds and debentures  or debt oriented mutual fund units, etc.
(iii) The Board may fix an  appropriate sub-limit for individual investments within each category of  instruments as specified in paragraph 3(i) above of these directions.
(iv) The Minimum Investment  Grade Rating (MIGR) assigned by the SEBI registered Rating Agencies would be  the requirement for investment by MGC in bonds / debentures and debt oriented  Mutual Funds.
Income recognition
5. (i) Mortgage Guarantee Companies  may book income on accrual basis on securities of corporate bodies / public  sector undertakings in respect of which the payment of inertest and repayment  of principal have been guaranteed by the Central Government or a State  Government, provided interest is serviced regularly and as such is not in  arrears.
(ii) Mortgage Guarantee  Companies may book income from dividend on shares of corporate bodies on  accrual basis provided dividend on the shares has been declared by the  corporate body in its Annual General Meeting and the owner's right to receive  payments is established.
(iii) Mortgage Guarantee  Companies may book income from Government securities and bonds and debentures  of corporate bodies on accrual basis, where interest rates on these instruments  are pre-determined and provided interest is serviced regularly and as such is  not in arrears.
(iv) Mortgage Guarantee  Companies should book income from units of mutual funds on cash basis.
Accounting of investments
6. (1) All investments shall be marked to market;
Quoted investments shall, for the purposes of  valuation, be grouped into the following categories, viz.,
(a) Government securities including treasury  bills,
(b) Government guaranteed bonds / securities;
(c) bonds of banks / PFIs;
(d) debentures / bonds of corporates; and
(e) Units of mutual fund.
Quoted investments for each  category shall be valued at cost or market value whichever is lower. For this  purpose, the investments in each category shall be considered scrip-wise and  the cost and market value aggregated for all investments in each category. If  the aggregate market value for the category is less than the aggregate cost for  that category, the net depreciation shall be provided for or charged to the  profit and loss account. If the aggregate market value for the category exceeds  the aggregate cost for the category, the net appreciation shall be ignored.  Depreciation in one category of investments shall not be set off against appreciation  in another category.
(2) Investments in unquoted  Government securities or Government guaranteed bonds shall be valued at  carrying cost.
(3) Unquoted investments  acquired in satisfaction of its debts shall be valued as under :
(a) Unquoted investments in  the units of mutual funds shall be valued at the net asset value declared by  the mutual fund in respect of each particular scheme;
(b) Unquoted equity shares  shall be valued at cost or break up value, whichever is lower. However, mortgage  guarantee companies may substitute fair value for the break up value of the  shares, if considered necessary. Where the balance sheet of the investee  company is not available for two years, such shares shall be valued at Rupee  one per company;
(c) Unquoted preference  shares shall be valued at cost or face value, whichever is lower.
Note :
Unquoted  debentures shall be treated as term loans or other type of credit facilities  depending upon the tenure of such debentures for the purpose of income  recognition and asset classification.
7. The MGC with the approval of the  Board shall frame an investment policy in tune with these directions.