(103 kb)
Notification as amended upto June 30, 2014 - "Mortgage Guarantee Companies Prudential Norms (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2008"
RBI/2014-15/51
DNBS.(PD-MGC).C.C.No.17/23.11.001/2014-15
July  1, 2014
To,
The Chairman / CEOs of
All Mortgage Guarantee Companies
Dear  Sir,
Notification  as amended upto June 30, 2014 -
"Mortgage Guarantee Companies Prudential Norms (Reserve Bank)  Directions, 2008"
As you  are aware, in order to have all current instructions on the subject at one  place, the Reserve Bank of India issues updated
circulars/notifications
. The  instructions contained in the
notification  No.DNBS(MGC)4/CGM(PK)-2008 dated February 15, 2008
updated as on June 30,  2014 are reproduced below. The updated Notification has also been  placed on the RBI web-site (
http://www.rbi.org.in
).
Yours faithfully,
(K.K.  Vohra)
Principal  Chief General Manager
Table of Contents
Para No.
Particulars
1
Short title, commencement and applicability of    the directions
2
Definitions
3
Income Recognition
4
Accounting Standards
5
Asset Classification
6
Provisioning    requirements
7
Other Activities
8
Accounting year
9
Disclosure in the    balance sheet
10
Constitution of Audit    Committee by mortgage guarantee company
11
Transactions in    Government securities
12
Requirement as to    capital adequacy
13
Loans against MGC’s    own shares prohibited
14
Concentration of    credit/Investment
15
Information in regard    to change of address, directors, auditors etc.
16
Exemptions
17
Interpretations
Reserve Bank of India
Department of Non-Banking Supervision
Central Office,
Centre I, World Trade Centre
Cuffe Parade, Colaba
Mumbai - 400 005
Notification  DNBS(PD)MGC.No.4/CGM(PK)-2008 February 15, 2008
The Reserve Bank of India, having considered it necessary  in the public interest, and being satisfied that, for the purpose of enabling  the Bank to regulate the credit system to the advantage of the country, it is  necessary to issue the directions relating to the prudential norms as set out  below, in exercise of the powers conferred by Section 45JA of the Reserve  Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934) and of all the powers enabling it in this  behalf, gives to every Mortgage Guarantee Company the directions hereinafter  specified.
Short  title, commencement and applicability of the directions
1.  (i) These directions shall be known as the "Mortgage Guarantee Companies Prudential Norms (Reserve Bank) Directions,  2008".
(ii) These directions shall  come into force with immediate effect and shall apply to every Mortgage  Guarantee Company which has been granted Certificate of Registration under the  scheme of Registration of Mortgage Guarantee Companies by the Reserve Bank of  India.
Definitions
2.  (1) For the purpose of these directions, unless the context otherwise requires  :
(i) "doubtful asset" means an asset  which remains a sub-standard asset for a period exceeding 12 months;
(ii) "hybrid debt capital  instrument" means capital instrument which possesses certain  characteristics of equity as well as of debt;
(iii) "loss asset" means :
(a) an asset which has been  identified as loss asset by the mortgage guarantee company or its internal or  external auditor or by the Reserve Bank of India, to the extent it is not  written off by the mortgage guarantee company; and
(b) an asset which is  adversely affected by a potential threat of non-recoverability for reasons like  erosion in the value of security or non availability of security or due to any  fraudulent act or omission on the part of the borrower, etc.;
(iv) "Mortgage  Guarantee Company" means as defined in paragraph 2(1)(l) of the Mortgage Guarantee Company (Reserve  Bank) Guidelines, 2008;
(v) (I) For the purpose of  these directions 'net owned fund' means :
(a) the aggregate of the  paid-up equity capital and free reserves as disclosed in the latest balance  sheet of the company after deducting therefrom -
(i) accumulated balance of loss;
(ii) deferred revenue expenditure; and
(iii) other intangible assets; and
(b) further reduced by the amounts  representing -
(1) investments of such company in shares of  -
(i) its subsidiaries;
(ii) companies in the same group;
(iii) all other non-banking financial  companies; and
(2) the book value of  debentures, bonds, outstanding loans and advances (including hire-purchase and  lease finance) made to, and deposits with -
(i) subsidiaries of such company; and
(ii) companies in the same group,
to the extent such amount exceeds ten per  cent, of (a) above.
(II)  "subsidiaries" and "companies in the same group" shall have  the same meanings assigned to them in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).]
(vi) 'non-performing asset'  (NPA) in respect of mortgage guarantee asset means, an asset acquired from the  credit institution on the happening of trigger event which is straight away  classified as non-performing asset and shall thereafter be classified according  to the age of NPA;
(vii) "owned  fund" means paid up equity capital, free reserves including contingency  reserves maintained as per paragraph 18 of the Guidelines on Registration and  Operations of Mortgage Guarantee Company, balance in share premium account and  capital reserves representing surplus arising out of sale proceeds of asset,  excluding reserves created by revaluation of asset, as reduced by accumulated  loss balance, book value of intangible assets and deferred revenue expenditure,  if any;
(viii) "standard  asset" means the asset in respect of which, no default in repayment of  principal or payment of interest is perceived and which does not disclose any  problem nor carry more than normal risk attached to the business;
(ix) "sub-standard  asset in respect of mortgage guarantee asset" means an asset which has  been classified as non-performing asset for a period not exceeding 12 months;
(x) "subordinated  debt" means an instrument, which is fully paid up, is unsecured and is  subordinated to the claims of other creditors and is free from restrictive  clauses and is not redeemable at the instance of the holder or without the  consent of the supervisory authority of the mortgage guarantee company. The  book value of such instrument shall be subjected to discounting as provided  hereunder :
Remaining Maturity of the Instruments
Rate of Discount
(a)
Upto    one year
100%
(b)
More    than one year but upto two years
80%
(c)
More    than two years but upto three years
60%
(d)
More    than three years but upto four years
40%
(e)
More    than four years but upto five years
20%
to the extent such discounted value does not exceed fifty per cent of Tier  I capital;
(xi) "substantial  interest" means holding of a beneficial interest by an individual or his  spouse or minor child, whether singly or taken together in the shares of a  company, the amount paid up on which exceeds ten per cent of the paid up  capital of the company; or the capital subscribed by all the partners of a  partnership firm;
(xii) "Tier I  Capital" means owned fund as reduced by investment in shares of other  non-banking financial companies and in shares, debentures, bonds, outstanding  loans and advances including hire purchase and lease finance made to and  deposits with subsidiaries and companies in the same group exceeding, in  aggregate, ten per cent of the owned fund;
Note
:- Investment in shares of  subsidiaries, companies in the same group and other NBFCs refers to that which  has been acquired by the mortgage guarantee company in satisfaction of debt;
(xiii) "Tier II Capital" includes  the following :-
(a) preference shares;
(b) revaluation reserves at discounted rate  of fifty five percent;
(c) general provisions and  loss reserves to the extent these are not attributable to actual diminution in  value or identifiable potential loss in any specific asset and are available to  meet unexpected losses and provisions made on standard assets, to the extent of  one and one fourth percent of risk weighted assets;
(d) hybrid debt capital instruments; and
(e) subordinated debt,
to the extent the aggregate does not exceed  Tier I capital;
(xiv) 'Turnover or business  turnover' means the total mortgage guarantee contracts entered during the year  together with the volume of business arising out of other activities undertaken  during the year;
(2) Other words or expressions  used but not defined herein and defined in the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934  (2 of 1934) or Mortgage Guarantee Company (Reserve Bank) Guidelines, 2008  contained in
Notification DNBS(PD)MGC)No.3/CGM (PK)-2008 dated February 15, 2008
shall have the same meaning as  assigned to them under that Act or that Directions. Any other words or  expressions not defined in that Act or that Directions, shall have the same  meaning assigned to them in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).
Income  recognition
3. (i) Income including interest / discount or any other  charges on an asset which is NPA or on an asset which is NPA and is taken over  from creditor institution on happening of trigger event shall be recognised  only on cash basis.
(ii) A mortgage guarantee  company shall account the premium or fee on the mortgage guarantee contracts as  an income in the profit and loss account in accordance with the Accounting  Standards issued by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India. The amount  of unearned premium shall be shown as a separate line on the liability side of  the balance sheet.
(iii) In respect of any  other business undertaken by the mortgage guarantee company as specified in Section 45 I (c) of the RBI Act, 1934 within the permitted limit, income shall be  recognised as per income recognition norms prescribed for such assets as  contained in the "Non-Banking Financial (Non-Deposit Accepting or  Holding) Companies Prudential Norms (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2007".
Accounting  standards
4. Accounting Standards and Guidance Notes issued by the  Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (referred to in these directions as  "ICAI") shall be followed insofar as they are not inconsistent with  any of the provisions of these directions.
Asset Classification
5. (1) Every mortgage guarantee  company shall, after taking into account the degree of well defined credit  weaknesses and extent of dependence on collateral security for realisation,  classify its assets, loans and advances and any other forms of credit into the  following classes, namely :
(i) Standard assets*;
(ii) Sub-standard assets;
(iii) Doubtful assets; and
(iv) Loss assets.
* Assets acquired under guarantee obligations  will not be classified as standard assets.
(2) The class of assets  referred to above shall not be upgraded merely as a result of rescheduling,  unless it satisfies the conditions as stipulated by the Bank from time to time,  required for the upgradation.
Provisioning requirements
6. (1)
Provision for losses on invoked guarantees
: A mortgage guarantee company is exposed to a potential loss when its  guarantee is invoked. Mortgage guarantee companies shall hold provisions for  losses in respect of such invoked guarantees pending recovery of assets. The  amount of provisions required to be held shall be equal to the contract-wise  aggregate of 'amount of invocation' after adjusting the realisable value of the  assets held by the company in respect of each housing loan where the guarantee  has been invoked. In case the realisable value of the assets held in respect of  any invoked guarantee is more than the amount of invocation, the excess shall  not be adjusted against the shortfall in other invoked guarantees. In case the  amount of provisions already held is in excess of the amount as computed above,  the excess shall not be reversed. The amount of provisions made each year shall  be shown as a separate line item in the Profit and Loss Account. The amount of  provision held for losses on settlement of invoked guarantees shall be shown as  a separate line item on the liability side of the balance sheet.
(2)
Provision for  'Incurred But-Not-Reported (IBNR) losses
': A mortgage guarantee company is  exposed to a potential loss when there is a default in a housing loan  guaranteed by it. Mortgage guarantee companies shall hold provisions in respect  of such defaulted housing loans where the trigger event is yet to occur or the  guarantee is yet to be invoked. The potential loss to which the guarantee  company is exposed to is referred to as 'Incurred-But-Not-Reported (IBNR)  losses'. The amount of provisions required to be held shall be arrived at on an  actuarial basis depending upon the estimates of loss frequency and loss  severity for incurred but not reported losses which are derived from historic  data, trends, economic factors and other statistical data in relation to paid  claims, the provisions held for claims settled, risk statistics, etc. In case  the amount of provisions already held is in excess of the amount as computed  above, the excess shall not be reversed. The amount of provisions made each  year shall be shown as a separate line item in the Profit and Loss Account. The  amount of provision held for Incurred But-Not-Reported (IBNR) losses shall be  shown as a separate line item on the liability side of the balance sheet.
(3) Subject to what has  been mentioned above, every mortgage guarantee company shall, after taking into  account the time lag between an account becoming non-performing, its  recognition as such, the realisation of the security and the erosion over time  in the value of security charged, make provision against each class as provided  hereunder :-
(4)
Mortgage guarantee assets
The provisioning requirement  in respect of mortgage guarantee assets shall be as under :
(i)
Loss    Assets
The    entire asset shall be written off. If the assets are permitted to remain in    the books for any reason, 100% of the outstanding should be provided for;
(ii)
Doubtful    Assets
(a)
100%    provision to the extent to which the advance is not covered by the realisable    value of the security to which the mortgage guarantee company has a valid    recourse shall be made. The realisable value is to be estimated on a    realistic basis;
(b)
In    regard to the secured portion, provision is to be made on the following basis    to the extent of 20% to 100% of the secured portion depending upon the period    for which the asset has remained doubtful:
Period for which the asset has remained      in doubtful category
% of provision
Up to one year
20
One to three years
30
More than three years
100
(iii)
Sub-standard    assets
A    general provision of 10% of total outstanding shall be made.
For    Standard Assets
Standard    asset
Mortgage    guarantee companies should make general provisions for standard asset on the    following basis;
(a)
Guarantee    cover for residential housing loans beyond Rs.20 lakhs at 1%;
(b)
All    other guarantee cover at 0.40%
Notes    :
(1)
The    provisions on standard asset should not be reckoned for arriving at net NPAs.
(2)
The    provisions towards standard assets need not be netted from gross advances but    shown separately as 'Contingent Provisions against Standard Assets' under    'Other Liabilities and Provisions Others' in the balance sheet.
(3)
It    is clarified that income recognition on and provisioning against NPAs are two    different aspects of prudential norms and provisions as per the norms are    required to be made on NPAs on total outstanding balances. The fact that    income on an NPA has not been recognised cannot be taken as reason for not    making provision.
Other  Activities
7. A mortgage guarantee company can take up any activity  up to 10% of its total assets. If a mortgage guarantee company undertakes any  other business as specified in 45I(c) of the RBI Act 1934 within the permitted  limit, for which Prudential Norms are already prescribed and the same is  contained in
Notification No.DNBS.193DG(VL)-2007 dated February 22, 2007
, as amended from time to time, the said norms  for valuation of investments, asset classification and provisioning should be  followed.
Accounting year
8. Every mortgage guarantee company shall prepare its  balance sheet and profit and loss account as on March 31 every year. Whenever a  mortgage guarantee company intends to extend the date of its balance sheet as  per provisions of the Companies Act, it should take prior approval of the  Reserve Bank of India before approaching the Registrar of Companies for this  purpose.
Further, even in cases  where the Bank and the Registrar of Companies grant extension of time, the  mortgage guarantee company shall furnish to the Bank a proforma balance sheet  (unaudited) as on March 31 of the year and the statutory returns due on the  said date.
Disclosure  in the balance sheet
9. (1) Every mortgage guarantee company shall separately  disclose in its balance sheet the provisions made as per paragraph 6 above  without netting them from the income or against the value of assets.
(2) The provisions shall be  distinctly indicated under separate heads of account separately for mortgage  guarantee business and others and individually for each type of assets as under  :-
(i) provisions for bad and  doubtful debts; and
(ii) provisions for  depreciation in investments.
(3) Such provisions for  each year shall be made from the profit and loss account.
Constitution of Audit Committee by mortgage  guarantee company
10. Every mortgage guarantee company shall constitute an  Audit Committee, consisting of not less than three non-executive Directors of  the Board of its company, at least one of whom will be Chartered Accountant.
Explanation I
: The Audit Committee  constituted by a mortgage guarantee company as required under Section 292A of  the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) shall be the Audit Committee for the  purposes of this paragraph.
Explanation II
: The Audit Committee  constituted under this paragraph shall have the same powers, functions and  duties as laid down in Section 292A of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).
Transactions in Government securities
11. Every mortgage guarantee company may undertake  transactions in Government securities through its CSGL account or its  demat account :
Provided that no mortgage  guarantee company shall undertake any transaction in government security in  physical form through any broker.
Requirement  as to capital adequacy
12. (1) Every mortgage guarantee company subject to the  condition that the net owned fund shall be a minimum of 100 crore rupees or  such other amount that Reserve Bank of India may specify from time to time,  shall maintain, a minimum capital ratio consisting of Tier I and Tier II  capital which shall not be less than ten per cent of its aggregate risk  weighted assets of its on balance sheet and of risk adjusted value of  off-balance sheet items. Of the required capital ratio, it shall maintain at  least 6% of its aggregate risk weighted assets as Tier I.
(2) The total of Tier II  capital, at any point of time, shall not exceed one hundred per cent of Tier I  capital.
Explanations
:
On balance sheet assets
(1) In these Directions,  degrees of credit risk expressed as percentage weightages have been assigned to  balance sheet assets. Hence, the value of each asset / item requires to be  multiplied by the relevant risk weights to arrive at risk adjusted value of  assets. The aggregate shall be taken into account for reckoning the minimum  capital ratio. The risk weighted asset shall be calculated as the weighted  aggregate of funded items as detailed hereunder :
Items of Assets - On-Balance Sheet Items
Risk Weight % Age
(i)
Cash
0
(ii)
Bank    balances and claims on banks including fixed deposits and certificates of    deposits.
20
(iii)
Investments
(a)
Central    Government and State Government Securities
0
(b)
Bonds    of banks
20
(c)
Fixed    deposits / certificates of deposits / bonds of public financial institutions
100
(d)
Shares    of all companies *and debentures / bonds / commercial papers of all companies    and units of debt oriented / money market mutual funds
100
(*As    per paragraph 3(ii) of Mortgage    Guarantee Companies Investment (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2008 shares of corporates can be acquired only in    satisfaction of debt)
(iv)
Current    Assets
(a)
Loans    and advances
100
(b)
Loans    to staff, if fully covered by superannuities, benefits & mortgage of    flats / houses
20
(c)
Other    loans to staff
100
(d)
Other    secured loans and advances
100
(e)
Others    (including net stock on hire, bills purchased and discounted, etc.)
100
(v)
Fixed    Assets (net of depreciation)
(a)
Assets    leased out (net book value)
100
(b)
Premises
100
(c)
Furniture    & Fixtures
100
(d)
Other    fixed assets
100
(vi)
Other    Assets
(a)
Income    tax deducted at source (net of provision)
0
(b)
Advance    tax paid (net of provision)
0
(c)
Interest    due on Government securities
0
(d)
Others
100
Notes    :
(1)
Netting    may be done only in respect of assets where provisions for depreciation or    for bad and doubtful debts have been made.
(2)
Assets    which have been deducted from owned fund to arrive at net owned fund shall    have a weightage of 'zero'.
(3)
While    calculating the aggregate of funded exposure of a borrower for the purpose of    assignment of risk weight, mortgage guarantee companies may net off the    amount of cash margin / caution money / security deposits (against which    right to set-off is available) held as collateral against the advances out of    the total outstanding exposure of the borrower.
Off-balance sheet items
(2) In these Directions,  degrees of credit risk exposure attached to off-balance sheet items have been  expressed as percentage of credit conversion factor. Hence, the face value of  each item requires to be first multiplied by the relevant conversion factor to  arrive at credit equivalent value of off-balance sheet item. The credit  equivalent value of each item shall have to be again multiplied by the risk  weight as applicable to the respective counterparties. The aggregate risk  weighted value shall be taken into account for reckoning the minimum capital  ratio. The credit equivalent value of the off-balance sheet items shall be  calculated as per the credit conversion factors for non-funded items as  detailed hereunder :
Nature of Item
Credit Conversion Factor - Percentage
i)
Financial    & other guarantees
100
ii)
Underwriting    obligations in r/o capital investment such as shares / debentures, etc
50
iii)
Partly-paid    shares / debentures
100
iv)
Lease    contracts entered into but yet to be executed
100
v)
Other    contingent liabilities
50
Note    : Cash margins / deposits shall be deducted before applying the conversion    factor.
Loans  against Mortgage Guarantee Company's own shares prohibited
13. (1) No mortgage guarantee company shall lend against  its own shares.
(2) Any outstanding loan  against its own shares shall be recovered by the mortgage guarantee company as  per the repayment schedule before grant of Certificate of Registration to it.
Concentration of credit / investment
14. (1) No mortgage guarantee company shall lend to
(a) any single borrower  exceeding fifteen per cent of its owned fund; and
(b) any single group of  borrowers exceeding twenty five per cent of its owned fund.
(2) Every mortgage  guarantee company shall formulate a policy in respect of exposures to a single  party / a single group of parties.
Notes
:
(1) For determining the  limits, off-balance sheet exposures shall be converted into credit risk by  applying the conversion factors as explained above.
(2) The investments in  debentures for the purposes specified in this paragraph shall be treated as  credit and not investment.
(3) These ceilings shall be  applicable to credit exposure by such a mortgage guarantee company to companies  / firms in its own group as well as to the borrower company's group.
Information  in regard to change of address, directors, auditors, etc. to be submitted
15. Every mortgage guarantee company shall communicate to  Reserve Bank of India, not later than one month from the occurrence of any  change in :
(a) the complete postal  address, telephone number/s and fax number/s of the registered / corporate  office;
(b) the names and  residential addresses of the directors of the company;
(c) the names and the  official designations of its principal officers;
(d) the names and office  address of the auditors of the company; and
(e) the specimen signatures  of the officers authorised to sign on behalf of the company.
Exemptions
16. The Reserve Bank of India may, if it considers it  necessary for avoiding any hardship or for any other just and sufficient  reason, grant extension of time to comply with or exempt any mortgage guarantee  company or class of mortgage guarantee companies, from all or any of the  provisions of these instructions either generally or for any specified period,  subject to such conditions as the Reserve Bank of India may impose.
Interpretations
17. For the purpose of giving  effect to the provisions of these directions, the Reserve Bank of India may, if  it considers necessary, issue necessary clarifications in respect of any matter  covered herein and the interpretation of any provision of these directions  given by the Reserve Bank of India shall be final and binding on all the  parties concerned.