(1197 kb)
Master Circular - Rupee / Foreign Currency Export Credit and Customer Service To Exporters
RBI/2014-15/69
DBOD No.DIR.BC.19/04.02.002/2014-15
July  1, 2014
10 Ashadha, 1936 (Saka)
All Scheduled Commercial  Banks
(excluding RRBs)
Dear Sir/Madam,
Master Circular- Rupee / Foreign Currency Export Credit
and Customer Service To Exporters
Please  refer to the
Master  Circular DBOD No.Dir.(Exp).BC16/04.02.002/2013-14 dated July 1,  2013
consolidating the instructions / guidelines issued to  banks till June 30, 2013, relating to Rupee / Foreign Currency Export Credit  & Customer Service  to Exporters. The
Master Circular
has been suitably updated by  incorporating the instructions issued upto June 30, 2014 and has also been  placed on the RBI website (
http://www.rbi.org.in
). A copy of the Master  Circular is enclosed.
Yours  faithfully
(Lily Vadera)
Chief General Manager
Encl: as above
Master Circular
RUPEE / FOREIGN CURRENCY EXPORT CREDIT & CUSTOMER SERVICE TO  EXPORTERS
CONTENTS
Sr.No.
Particulars
A
Purpose
B
Classification
C
Previous    instructions consolidated
D
Scope of    Application
Structure
Introduction
Part –A Rupee Export    Credit
1
Pre-shipment Rupee Export Credit
2
Post-shipment Rupee Export Credit
3
Deemed Exports –Prescribed Rate for Rupee Export Credit
4
Interest    on Rupee Export Credit
Part-B Export Credit in    Foreign Currency
5
Pre-Shipment Export Credit in Foreign Currency
6
Post-Shipment Export Credit in Foreign Currency
7
Interest on Export Credit    in Foreign Currency
Part-C Export Credit-Customer Service and    Simplification of Procedures for Delivery and Reporting Requirements
8
Customer Service and Simplification of Procedures
9
Reporting Requirements
10
Pre-Shipment Credit to Diamond Exporters- Conflict Diamonds
11
ANNEX 1-Recommendations    of the Working Group to Review Export Credit
12
ANNEX 2-Export Credit    Data (Disbursement/Outstandings)
13
ANNEX 3-Undertaking from    Diamond Clients
14
Annex 4 – Annex of 134    tariffs of engineering goods of 6th Interest Subvention Scheme    dated January 14, 2013
15
Annex 5 – Annex of 131    tariffs of Engineering goods of    Interest Subvention–circular dated May 24, 2013.
16
Annex 6 – Annex of 6    tariffs of Textile goods of interest subvention circular dated May 24, 2013.
17
Appendix I-    Rupee Export Credit-Circulars
18
Appendix II- Export Credit in Foreign Currency-Circulars
19
Appendix III- Export Credit-Customer    Service-Circulars
A. Purpose
To consolidate the framework of rules/regulations and clarifications on  Export Credit and Customer Service to exporters  issued by Reserve Bank of India from time to  time.
B. Classification
A statutory directive issued by the Reserve Bank in exercise of the  powers conferred by Sections 21 and 35 A of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
C. Previous instructions consolidated
This Master Circular consolidates and updates all the instructions  contained in the Circulars listed in the Appendices and clarifications issued  during the year.
D. Scope of Application
Applicable to all Scheduled Commercial Banks, excluding Regional Rural  Banks.
Structure
PART – A
Rupee Export Credit
1. Pre-shipment Rupee Export Credit
2. Post-shipment Rupee Export Credit
3. Deemed Exports – Prescribed Rate of Rupee  Export Credit
4. Interest on Rupee Export  Credit
PART- B
Export Credit in Foreign  Currency
5. Pre-shipment Export Credit in Foreign  Currency
6. Post-shipment Export Credit in Foreign  Currency
7. Interest on Export  Credit in Foreign Currency
PART – C
Export Credit - Customer Service, Simplification  of Procedures for Delivery and Reporting Requirements
8. Customer service and simplification of  procedures
9.  Reporting requirements
10. Pre-shipment credit to diamond exporters-  conflict diamonds
11. ANNEX 1-Recommendations of the Working Group  to Review Export Credit
12.  ANNEX 2- Export Credit Data (Disbursement/ Outstandings)
13.  ANNEX3- Undertaking from Diamond Clients
14.  Appendix I - Rupee Export Credit-Circulars
15.  Appendix II - Export Credit in Foreign Currency-Circulars
16. Appendix III- Export  Credit-Customer Service-Circulars
INTRODUCTION
Export Credit Scheme
The RBI first introduced the scheme of Export Financing in 1967. The scheme is intended to make short-term  working capital finance available to exporters at internationally comparable interest  rates.
Under the earlier scheme in force upto June 30, 2010, RBI fixed only the  ceiling rate of interest for export credit while banks were free to decide the  rates of interest within the ceiling rates keeping in view the Benchmark Prime  Lending Rate (BPLR) and spread guidelines and taking into account track record  of the borrowers and the risk perception. In order to enhance transparency in banks' pricing of their loan  products, banks were advised to fix their BPLR after taking into account (i) actual  cost of funds, (ii) operating expenses  and (iii) a minimum margin to cover regulatory requirement of provisioning /  capital charge and profit margin. However,  the BPLR system, introduced in 2003, fell short  of its original objective of bringing transparency to lending rates. This was  mainly because under the BPLR system, banks could lend below BPLR. For the same  reason, it was also difficult to assess the transmission of policy rates of the  Reserve Bank to lending rates of banks.
Accordingly, based on the recommendations of the Working  Group on Benchmark Prime Lending Rate (Chairman: Shri Deepak Mohanty) banks  were advised to switch over to the system of Base Rate w.e.f. July 1, 2010. The  Base Rate System is aimed at enhancing transparency in lending rates of banks  and enabling better assessment of transmission of monetary policy. Under the  Base Rate System, applicable w.e.f. July 1, 2010, interest rates applicable for  all tenors of rupee export credit advances are at or above Base Rate.
PART - A
RUPEE EXPORT CREDIT
1.
PRE-SHIPMENT  RUPEE EXPORT CREDIT
1.1
Rupee  Pre-shipment Credit/Packing Credit
1.1.1 Definition
'Pre-shipment  / Packing Credit'
means any loan or advance granted or any other  credit provided by a bank to an exporter for financing the purchase, processing, manufacturing or  packing of goods prior to shipment /  working capital expenses towards rendering of services on the basis of letter  of credit opened in his favour or in favour of some other person, by an  overseas buyer or a confirmed and irrevocable order for the export of goods /  services from India or any other evidence of an order for export from India  having been placed on the exporter or some other person, unless lodgement of  export orders or letter of credit with the bank has been waived.
1.1.2
Period of Advance
(i) The period for which a packing credit advance may  be given by a bank will depend upon the circumstances of the individual case,  such as the time required for procuring, manufacturing or processing (where  necessary) and shipping the relative goods / rendering of services. It is primarily for the banks to decide the  period for which a packing credit advance may be given, having regard to the  various relevant factors so that the period is sufficient to enable the  exporter to ship the goods / render the services.
(ii) If pre-shipment advances are not adjusted by  submission of export documents within 360 days from the date of advance, the  advances will cease to qualify for prescribed rate of interest for export  credit to the exporter
ab initio
.
(ii) RBI would provide refinance only for a period not  exceeding 180 days as per instructions issued by RBI (MPD).
1.1.3
Disbursement of Packing Credit
(i) Ordinarily, each packing credit sanctioned should  be maintained as separate account for the purpose of monitoring the period of  sanction and end-use of funds.
(ii) Banks may release the packing credit in one lump  sum or in stages as per the requirement for executing the orders / LC.
(iii) Banks may also maintain different accounts at  various stages of processing, manufacturing etc. depending on the types of  goods / services to be exported e.g. hypothecation, pledge, etc., accounts and  may ensure that the outstanding balance in accounts are adjusted by transfer  from one account to the other and finally by proceeds of relative export  documents on purchase, discount, etc.
(iv) Banks should continue to keep a close watch on the  end-use of the funds and ensure that credit at lower rates of interest is used  for genuine requirements of exports. Banks should also monitor the progress  made by the exporters in timely fulfillment of export orders.
1.1.4
Liquidation of Packing  Credit
(i) General
The packing credit / pre-shipment credit granted  to an exporter may be liquidated out of proceeds of bills drawn for the  exported commodities on its purchase, discount etc., thereby converting  pre-shipment credit into post-shipment credit. Further, subject to mutual  agreement between the exporter and the banker it can also be repaid / prepaid  out of balances in Exchange Earners Foreign Currency A/c (EEFC A/c) as also  from rupee resources of the exporter to the extent exports have actually taken  place. If not so liquidated/ repaid, banks are free to decide the rate of  interest as indicated in paragraph 4.2.3 from the date of advance.
(ii) Packing credit in excess of export value
a)
Where by-product can be  exported
Where the exporter is unable to tender export  bills of equivalent value for liquidating the packing credit due to the  shortfall on account of wastage involved in the processing of agro products  like raw cashew nuts, etc., banks may allow exporters,
inter alia
, to extinguish the excess packing credit by export bills  drawn in respect of by-product like cashew shell oil, etc.
b)
Where partial domestic sale is involved
However, in respect of export of agro-based  products like tobacco, pepper, cardamom, cashew nuts etc., the exporter has  necessarily to purchase a somewhat larger quantity of the raw agricultural  produce and grade it into exportable and non-exportable varieties and only the  former is exported. The non-exportable balance is necessarily sold  domestically. For the packing credit covering such non-exportable portion,  banks are required to charge commercial rate of interest applicable to the  domestic advance from the date of advance of packing credit and that portion of  the packing credit would not be eligible for any refinance from RBI.
c)
Export of deoiled /defatted cakes
Banks are permitted to grant packing credit  advance to exporters of HPS groundnut and deoiled / defatted cakes to the extent  of the value of raw materials required even though the value thereof exceeds  the value of the export order. The advance in excess of the export order is  required to be adjusted either in cash or by sale of residual by-product oil  within a period not exceeding 30 days from the date of advance to be eligible  for concessional rate of interest.
(iii) Banks have, however, operational flexibility to extend the following relaxations to  their exporter clients who have a good  track record:
a) Repayment / liquidation of packing credit with  proceeds of export documents will continue; however, this could be with export documents relating to any other order covering  the same or any other commodity exported by the exporter. While allowing  substitution of contract in this way, banks should ensure that it is  commercially necessary and unavoidable. Banks should also satisfy themselves  about the valid reasons as to why packing credit extended for shipment of a  particular commodity cannot be liquidated in the normal method. As far as  possible, the substitution of contract should be allowed if the exporter  maintains account with the same bank or it has the approval of the members of  the consortium, if any.
b) The existing packing credit may also be marked-off  with proceeds of export documents against which no packing credit has been  drawn by the exporter. However, it is possible that the exporter might avail of  EPC with one bank and submit the documents to another bank. In view of this  possibility, banks may extend such facility after ensuring that the exporter  has not availed of packing credit from another bank against the documents  submitted. If any packing credit has  been availed of from another bank, the bank to which the documents are submitted  has to ensure that the proceeds are used to liquidate the packing credit  obtained from the first bank.
c) These relaxations
should not be extended
to transactions of sister / associate /  group concerns.
1.1.5
'Running Account' Facility
(i) As stated earlier, pre-shipment credit to  exporters is normally provided on lodgment of LCs or firm export orders. It is  observed that the availability of raw materials is seasonal in some cases. In  some other cases, the time taken for manufacture and shipment of goods is more  than the delivery schedule as per export contracts. In many cases, the  exporters have to procure raw material, manufacture the export product and keep  the same ready for shipment, in anticipation of receipt of letters of credit /  firm export orders from the overseas buyers. Having regard to difficulties  being faced by the exporters in availing of adequate pre-shipment credit in  such cases, banks have been authorised to extend Pre-shipment Credit
‘Running Account’
facility in respect  of any commodity, without  insisting on prior lodgement of letters of credit / firm export orders,  depending on the bank’s judgement regarding the need to extend such a facility  and subject to the following conditions:
(a) Banks may extend the ‘Running Account’ facility  only to those exporters whose track record  has been good as also to Export Oriented Units (EOUs)/ Units in Free Trade  Zones / Export Processing Zones (EPZs) and Special Economic Zones (SEZs)
(b) In all cases where Pre-shipment Credit ‘Running  Account’ facility has been extended, letters of credit / firm orders should be  produced within a reasonable period of time to be decided by the banks.
(c) Banks should mark off individual export bills, as  and when they are received for negotiation / collection, against the earliest  outstanding pre-shipment credit on 'First In First Out' (FIFO) basis. Needless  to add that, while marking off the pre-shipment credit in the manner indicated above,  banks should ensure that export credit available in respect of individual  pre-shipment credit does not go beyond the period of sanction or 360 days from  the date of advance, whichever is earlier.
(d) Packing credit can also be marked-off with  proceeds of export documents against which no packing credit has been drawn by  the exporter.
(ii) If it is noticed that the exporter is found to be  abusing the facility, the facility should be withdrawn forthwith.
(iii) In cases where exporters have not complied with the  terms and conditions, the advance will attract commercial lending rate
ab initio
. In such cases, banks will be required to pay  higher rate of interest on the portion of refinance availed of by them from the  RBI in respect of the relative pre-shipment credit. All such cases should be  reported to the Monetary Policy Department, Reserve Bank of India, Central  Office, Mumbai 400 001 which will decide the rate of interest to be charged on  the refinance amount.
(vi) Running account facility should not be granted to  sub-suppliers.
1.1.6
Interest  on Packing Credit
Interest rate structure and instructions in regard  thereto are detailed in paragraph 4.
1.1.7
Export  Credit against proceeds of cheques, drafts, etc. representing advance payment  for exports
(i) Where exporters receive direct remittances from abroad  by means of cheques, drafts etc. in payment for exports, banks may grant export  credit to exporters of good track record till the realisation of proceeds of  the cheque, draft etc. received from abroad, after satisfying themselves that  it is against an export order, is as per trade practices in respect of the  goods in question and is an approved method of realisation of export proceeds  as per extant rules.
(ii) If, pending compliance with the above conditions, an  exporter has been granted accommodation at normal commercial interest rate,  banks may give effect to prescribed rate for export credit rate retrospectively  once the aforesaid conditions have been complied with and refund the difference  to the exporter.
1.2
Rupee  Pre-shipment Credit to specific sectors/segments
1.2.1
Rupee  Export Packing Credit to manufacturer suppliers for exports routed through  STC/MMTC/Other Export Houses, Agencies etc.
(i) Banks may grant export packing credit to manufacturer  suppliers who do not have export orders/letters of credit in their own name and  goods are exported through the State Trading Corporation/Minerals and Metal  Trading Corporation or other export houses, agencies etc.
(ii) Such advances will be eligible for refinance, provided  the following requirements are complied with apart from the usual stipulations:
Banks should  obtain from the export house a letter setting out the details of the export  order and the portion thereof to be executed by the supplier and also  certifying that the export house has not obtained and will not ask for packing  credit in respect of such portion of the order as is to be executed by the  supplier.
Banks should,  after mutual consultations and taking into account the export requirements of  the two parties, apportion between the two i.e. the Export House and the  Supplier, the period of packing credit for which the concessionary rate of  interest is to be charged. The concessionary rates of interest on the  pre-shipment credit will be available upto the stipulated periods in respect of  the export house/agency and the supplier put together.
The export house  should open inland L/Cs in favour of the supplier giving relevant particulars  of the export LCs or orders and the outstandings in the packing credit account  should be extinguished by negotiation of bills under such inland LCs. If it is  inconvenient for the export house to open such inland LCs in favour of the  supplier, the latter should draw bills on the export house in respect of the  goods supplied for export and adjust packing credit advances from the proceeds  of such bills. In case the bills drawn under such arrangement are not  accompanied by bills of lading or other export documents, the bank should  obtain through the supplier a certificate from the export house at the end of  every quarter that the goods supplied under this arrangement have in fact been  exported. The certificate should give particulars of the relative bills such as  date, amount and the name of the bank through which the bills have been  negotiated.
Banks should obtain an undertaking from the  supplier that the advance payment, if any, received from the export house  against the export order would be credited to the packing credit account.
1.2.2
Rupee  Export Packing Credit to Sub-Suppliers
Packing credit can be shared between an Export Order  Holder (EOH) and sub-supplier of raw materials, components etc. of the exported  goods as in the case of EOH and manufacturer suppliers, subject to the  following:
Running Account facility is  not contemplated under the scheme. The scheme will cover the LC or export  order received in favour of Export Houses/Trading Houses/Star Trading Houses  etc. or manufacturer exporters only. The scheme should be made available to the  exporters with good track record.
Bankers to an EOH will open an inland LC specifying the  goods to be supplied by the sub-supplier to the EOH against the export order or  LC received by him as a part of the export transaction. On the basis of such a LC,  the sub-supplier's banker will grant EPC as working capital to enable the  sub-supplier to manufacture the components required for the goods to be  exported. On supplying the goods, the LC opening bank will pay to the  sub-supplier's banker against the inland documents received on the basis of  inland LC. Such payments will thereafter become the EPC of the EOH.
It is upto the EOH to open any number of LCs for the  various components required with the approval of his banker/leader of  consortium of banks within the overall value limit of the order or LC received  by him. Taking into account the operational convenience, it is for the LC  opening bank to fix the minimum amount for opening such LCs. The total period  of packing credit availed by the sub-supplier (s), individually or severally  and the EOH should be within normal cycle of production required for the  exported goods. Normally, the total period will be computed from the date of  first drawal of packing credit by any one of the sub-suppliers to the date of  submission of export documents by EOH.
The EOH will be responsible for exporting the goods as  per export order or overseas LC and any delay in the process will subject him  to the penal provisions issued from time to time. Once the sub-supplier makes  available the goods as per inland LC terms to the EOH, his obligation of  performance under the scheme will be treated as complied with and the penal  provisions will not be applicable to him for delay by EOH, if any.
The scheme  is an additional window besides the existing system of sharing of packing  credit between EOH and manufacturer in respect of exported goods as detailed in  paragraph 1.2.1 above. The scheme will cover  only the first stage of production cycle.
For example
, a manufacturer exporter will be allowed to open  domestic LC in favour of his immediate suppliers of components etc. that are  required for manufacture of exportable goods. The scheme will not be extended  to cover suppliers of raw materials/components etc. to such immediate  suppliers. In case the EOH is merely a trading house, the facility will be  available commencing from the manufacturer to whom the order has been passed on  by the Trading House.
EOUs/EPZ/SEZ units supplying goods to another  EOU/EPZ/SEZ unit for export purposes are also eligible for rupee pre-shipment  export credit under this scheme. However, the supplier EOU/EPZ/SEZ unit will  not be eligible for any post-shipment facility as the scheme does not cover  sale of goods on credit terms.
The scheme  does not envisage any change in the total quantum of advance or period.  Accordingly, the credit extended under the system will be treated as export  credit from the date of advance to the sub-supplier to the date of liquidation  by EOH under the inland export LC system and upto the date of liquidation of  packing credit by shipment of goods by EOH and will be eligible for refinance  from RBI by the respective banks for the appropriate periods. It has to be  ensured that no double financing of the same leg of the transaction is  involved.
Banks may  approach the ECGC for availing suitable cover in respect of such advances.
The  scheme does not envisage extending credit by a sub-supplier to the EOH/manufacturer and thus, the payment  to sub-suppliers has to be made against submission of documents by LC opening  bank treating the payment as EPC of the EOH.
1.2.3
Rupee Pre-shipment Credit to Construction  Contractors
(i) The packing credit advances to the construction  contractors to meet their initial working capital requirements for execution of  contracts abroad may be made on the basis of a firm contract secured from  abroad, in a separate account, on an undertaking obtained from them that the  finance is required by them for incurring preliminary expenses in connection  with the execution of the contract e.g., for transporting the necessary  technical staff and purchase of consumable articles for the purpose of  executing the contract abroad, etc.
(ii) The advances should be adjusted within 365 days of the date of advance by negotiation of bills relating to  the contract or by remittances received from abroad in respect of the contract  executed abroad. To the extent the outstandings in the account are not adjusted  in the stipulated manner, banks may charge normal rate of interest on such  advance.
(iii) The exporters undertaking project export contracts  including export of services may comply with the guidelines/instructions issued  by Reserve Bank of India, Foreign Exchange Department, Central Office, Mumbai  from time to time.
1.2.4
Export of Services
Pre-shipment and post-shipment finance may be provided to exporters of  all the 161 tradable services covered under the General Agreement on Trade in Services  (GATS) where payment for such services is received in free foreign exchange as  stated at Chapter 3 of the Foreign Trade Policy 2009-14. All provisions of this  circular shall apply mutatis mutandis to export of services as they apply to  export of goods unless otherwise specified. A list of services is given in Appendix 10 of HBPv1.  The financing bank should ensure that there is no double financing and the  export credit is liquidated with remittances from abroad. Banks may take into account the track record  of the exporter/overseas counter party while sanctioning the export credit. The  statement of export receivables from such service providers may be tallied with  the statement of payables received from the overseas party.
In view of the large number of categories of service exports with varied  nature of business as well as in the environment of progressive deregulation  where the matters with regard to micro management are left to be decided by the  individual financing banks, the banks may formulate their own parameters to  finance the service exporters.
Exporters of services qualify for working capital export credit (pre and  post shipment) for consumables, wages, supplies etc.
Banks may ensure that –
The proposal is a genuine case of export of services.
The item of service export is covered under Appendix 10 of HBPv1.
The exporter is registered with the Electronic and software EPC or  Services EPC or with Federation of Indian Export Organisations, as applicable.
There is an Export Contract for the export of the service.
There is a time lag between the outlay of working capital expense  and actual receipt of payment from the service consumer or his principal  abroad.
There is a valid Working Capital gap i.e. service is provided  first while the payment is received some time after an invoice is raised.
Banks should ensure that there is no double financing/excess  financing.
The export credit granted does not exceed the foreign exchange  earned less the margins if any required, advance payment/credit received.
Invoices are raised.
Inward remittance is received in Foreign Exchange.
Company will raise the  invoice as per the contract. Where payment is received from overseas party, the  service exporter would utilize the funds to repay the export credit availed of  from the bank.
1.2.5
Pre-shipment  Credit to Floriculture, Grapes and Other Agro-based Products
In the case of floriculture, pre-shipment  credit is allowed to be extended by banks for purchase of cut-flowers etc. and  all post-harvest expenses incurred for making shipment.
However, with a view to promoting export of  floriculture, grapes and other agro-based products, banks are allowed to extend  concessional credit for working capital purposes in respect of export-related  activities of all agro-based products including purchase of fertilizers, pesticides  and other inputs for growing of flowers, grapes etc., provided banks are in a  position to clearly identify such activities as export-related and satisfy  themselves of the export potential thereof, and that the activities are not  covered by direct/indirect finance schemes of NABARD or any other agency,  subject to the normal terms & conditions relating to packing credit such as  period, quantum, liquidation etc.
Export credit should not be  extended for investments, such as, import of foreign technology, equipment,  land development etc. or any other item which cannot be regarded as working  capital.
1.2.6
Export Credit to Processors/Exporters - Agri-Export Zones
Government of India has set up Agri-Export  Zones in the country to promote Agri Exports. Agri- Export Oriented Units  (processing) are set up in Agri- Export zones as well as outside the zones and  to promote such units, production and processing are to be integrated. The  producer has to enter into contract farming with farmers and has to ensure supply  of quality seeds, pesticides, micro-nutrients and other material to the group  of farmers from whom the exporter would be purchasing the products as raw  material for production of the final products for export. The Government,  therefore, suggested that such export processing units may be provided packing  credit under the extant guidelines for the purpose of procuring and supplying  inputs to the farmers so that quality inputs are available to them which in  turn will ensure that only good quality crops are raised. The exporters will be  able to purchase / import such inputs in bulk, which will have the advantages  of economies of scale.
Banks may treat the inputs supplied to farmers by exporters as raw  material for export and consider sanctioning the lines of credit/export credit  to processors/exporters to cover the cost of such inputs required by farmers to  cultivate such crops to promote export of agri products. The processor units  would be able to effect bulk purchases of the inputs and supply the same to the  farmers as per a pre-determined arrangement.
Banks have to ensure that the exporters have made the required  arrangements with the farmers and overseas buyers in respect of crops to be  purchased and products to be exported respectively. The financing banks will  also appraise the projects in agri export zones and ensure that the tie-up  arrangements are feasible and projects would take off within a reasonable  period of time.
They are also to monitor the end-use of funds, viz. distribution  of the inputs by the exporters to the farmers for raising the crops as per  arrangements made by the exporter/main processor units.
They have to further ensure  that the final products are exported by the processors/exporters as per the  terms and conditions of the sanction in order to liquidate the pre-shipment  credit as per extant instructions.
2.
POST-SHIPMENT  RUPEE EXPORT CREDIT
2.1
Definition:
'Post-shipment Credit' means any loan or advance  granted or any other credit provided by a bank to an exporter of goods /  services from India from the date of extending credit after shipment of goods /  rendering of services to the date of realisation of export proceeds as per the  period of realization prescribed by FED, and includes any loan or advance  granted to an exporter, in consideration of, or on the security of any duty  drawback allowed by the Government from time to time. As per the current  instructions of FED, the period prescribed for realisation of export proceeds  is 12 months from the date of shipment.
2.2
Types of Post-shipment Credits:
Post-shipment advance can mainly take the form of  -
(i)  Export bills purchased/discounted/negotiated.
(ii)  Advances against bills for collection.
(iii)  Advances against duty drawback receivable from Government.
2.3
Liquidation of Post-shipment Credit
:
Post-shipment credit is to be liquidated by the  proceeds of export bills received from abroad in respect of goods exported /  services rendered. Further, subject to mutual agreement between the exporter  and the banker it can also be repaid / prepaid out of balances in Exchange  Earners Foreign Currency Account (EEFC A/C) as also from proceeds of any other  unfinanced (collection) bills. Such adjusted export bills should however  continue to be followed up for realization of the export proceeds and will  continue to be reported in the XOS statement.
In order to reduce the cost to exporters (i.e.  interest cost on overdue export bills), exporters with overdue export bills may  also extinguish their overdue post shipment rupee export credit from their rupee  resources. However, the corresponding GR form will remain outstanding and the  amount will be shown outstanding in XOS statement. The exporter’s liability for  realisation would continue till the export bill is realised.
2.4
Rupee  Post-shipment Export Credit
2.4.1
Period
i. In the case of demand bills, the period of advance shall be the Normal Transit Period  (NTP) as specified by FEDAI.
ii. In case of usance bills,  credit can be granted for a maximum duration of 365 daysfrom  date of shipment inclusive of Normal Transit Period (NTP) and grace period, if  any. However, banks should closely  monitor the need for extending post-shipment credit upto the permissible period  of 365 days and they should persuade the exporters to realise the export  proceeds within a shorter period.
iii.
'Normal  transit period'
means the average period normally involved from  the date of negotiation / purchase / discount till the receipt of bill proceeds  in the Nostro account of the bank concerned, as prescribed by FEDAI from time  to time. It is not to be confused with the time taken for the arrival of goods  at overseas destination.
iv.
An overdue bill
in the case of a demand bill, is a bill which is not paid before  the expiry of the normal transit period, plus grace period and
in  the case of a usance bill, is a bill which is not paid on the due date.
2.4.2
Interest Rate Structure
Interest rate structure on post-shipment credit  and instructions in regard thereto are detailed in paragraph 4.
2.4.3
Advances against Undrawn Balances on Export  Bills
In respect of export of certain commodities where  exporters are required to draw the bills on the overseas buyer upto 90 to 98  percent of the FOB value of the contract, the residuary amount being 'undrawn  balance' is payable by the overseas buyer after satisfying himself about the  quality/ quantity of goods.
Payment of undrawn balance is contingent in  nature. Banks may consider granting advances against undrawn balances at  concessional rate of interest based on their commercial judgement and the track  record of the buyer. Such advances are, however, eligible for concessional rate  of interest for a maximum period of 90 days only to the extent these are repaid  by actual remittances from abroad and provided such remittances are received  within 180 days after the expiry of NTP in the case of demand bills and due  date in the case of usance bills. For the period beyond 90 days, the rate of  interest specified for the category Export Credit Not Otherwise Specified (ECNOS)  at post-shipment stage may be charged.
2.4.4
Advances against Retention Money
(i) In the case of turnkey projects/construction  contracts, progressive payments are made by the overseas employer in respect of  services segment of the contract, retaining a small percentage of the  progressive payments as retention money which is payable after expiry of the  stipulated period from the date of the completion of the contract, subject to  obtention of certificate(s) from the specified authority.
(ii) Retention money may also be sometimes stipulated  against the supplies portion in the case of turn-key projects. It may like-wise  arise in the case of sub-contracts. The payment of retention money is  contingent in nature as it is a deffered liability.
(iii) The following guidelines should be followed in  regard to grant of advances against retention money:
No advances may  be granted against retention money relating to services portion of the  contract.
Exporters  may be advised to arrange, as far as possible, provision of suitable  guarantees, instead of retention money.
Banks  may consider, on a selective basis, granting of advances against retention  money relating to the supplies portion of the contract taking into account,  among others, the size of the retention money accumulated, its impact on the  liquid funds position of the exporter and the past performance regarding the  timely receipt of retention money.
The  payment of retention money may be secured by LC or Bank Guarantee where  possible.
Where the retention money is  payable within a period of one year from the date of shipment, according to the  terms of the contract, banks should charge prescribed rate of interest upto a  maximum period of 90 days. The rate of interest prescribed for the category  'ECNOS' at post-shipment stage may be charged for the period beyond 90 days.
Where the retention money is payable after a  period of one year from the date of shipment, according to the terms of the  contract and the corresponding advance is extended for a period exceeding one  year, it will be treated as post-shipment credit given on deferred payment  terms exceeding one year,  andthe bank is free to decide the rate of interest.
Advances against retention  money will be eligible for concessional rate of interest only to the extent the  advances are actually repaid by remittances received from abroad relating to  the retention money and provided such payments are received within 180 days  from the due date of payment of the retention money, according to the terms of  the contract
2.4.5
Export on Consignment Basis
(i)
General
Export on consignment basis lends scope for  a lot of misuse in the matter of repatriation of export proceeds.
Therefore,  export on consignment basis should be at par with exports on outright sale  basis on cash terms in matters regarding the rate of interest to be charged by  banks on post-shipment credit. Thus, in the case of exports on consignment  basis, even if extension in the period beyond 365 days  is granted by the Foreign Exchange Department (FED) for repatriation of export  proceeds, banks will charge appropriate prescribed rate of interest only upto  the notional due date (depending upon the tenor of the bills), subject to a  maximum of 365 days.
(ii)
Export of precious and semi-precious stones
Precious and semi-precious stones, etc. are  exported mostly on consignment basis and the exporters are not in a position to  liquidate pre-shipment credit account with remittances received from abroad  within a period of 365 days from the date of  advance. Banks may, therefore, adjust packing credit advances in the case of  consignment exports, as soon as export takes place, by transfer of the  outstanding balance to a special (post-shipment) account which in turn, should  be adjusted as soon as the relative proceeds are received from abroad but not  later than 365 days from the date of export or  such extended period as may be permitted by Foreign Exchange Department,  Reserve Bank of India. Balance in the special (post-shipment) account will not be eligible for refinance from  RBI.
(iii)
Extension  of realization of export proceeds for period upto 12/15 months
RBI (FED) has been allowing in  deserving cases, on application by individual exporters with
satisfactory track record, a  longer period from the date of shipment for realization of proceeds of exports.  Specified category of exporters have also been granted general permission of  longer periods for export realisation. Banks may be guided by the Master  Circular on Exports of goods and services for the current period of export  realisation.
Banks may extend post-shipment credit to such exporters for a longer  period ab-initio. Accordingly, the  interest rate upto180 days from the date of  advance will be the rate applicable for usance bills for period upto180 days. Beyond 180  days from the  date of shipment, banks are free to decide on the rate of interest. In case the  sale proceeds are not realised within the sanctioned period, the higher rate of  interest as applicable for 'ECNOS'-post-shipment will apply for the entire  period beyond 180 days.
Refinance to banks  against export credit would however, be available from RBI, upto a period of 180  days at post-shipment stage as per guidelines issued by RBI(MPD).
2.4.6
Export  of Goods for Exhibition and Sale
Banks may provide finance to exporters against  goods sent for exhibition and sale abroad in the normal course in the first  instance, and after the sale is completed, allow the benefit of the prescribed rate  of interest on such advances, both at the pre-shipment stage and at the  post-shipment stage, upto the stipulated periods, by way of a rebate. Such  advances should be given in separate accounts.
2.4.7
Post-shipment  Credit on Deferred Payment Terms
Banks may grant post-shipment credit on deferred  payment terms for a period exceeding one year, in respect of export of capital  and producer goods as specified by RBI (FED) from time to time.
2.5
Post-shipment  Advances against Duty Drawback Entitlements
2.5.1
Banks may  grant post-shipment advances to exporters against their duty drawback  entitlements and covered by ECGC guarantee as provisionally certified by Customs  Authorities pending final sanction and payment.
2.5.2
The  advance against duty drawback receivables can also be made available to  exporters against export promotion copy of the shipping bill containing the EGM  Number issued by the Customs Department. Where necessary, the financing bank  may have its lien noted with the designated bank and arrangements may be made  with the designated bank to transfer funds to the financing bank as and when  duty drawback is credited by the Customs.
2.5.3
These advances granted against duty drawback  entitlements would be eligible for concessional rate of interest and refinance  from RBI upto a maximum period of 90 days from the date of advance.
2.6
ECGC  Whole Turnover Post-shipment Guarantee Scheme
2.6.1
The Whole  Turnover Post-shipment Guarantee Scheme of the Export Credit Guarantee  Corporation of India Ltd. (ECGC) provides protection to banks against  non-payment of post-shipment credit by exporters. Banks may, in the interest of  export promotion, consider opting for the Whole Turnover Post-shipment Policy.  The salient features of the scheme may be obtained from ECGC.
2.6.2
As the  post-shipment guarantee is mainly intended to benefit the banks, the cost of  premium in respect of the Whole Turnover Post-shipment Guarantee taken out by  banks may be absorbed by the banks and not  passed on to the exporters.
2.6.3
Where the risks are covered by the ECGC, banks  should not slacken their efforts  towards realisation of their dues against long outstanding export bills.
3.
DEEMED  EXPORTS - RUPEE EXPORT CREDIT AT PRESCRIBED RATES
3.1
Banks  are permitted to extend rupee pre-shipment and post-supply rupee export credit  at prescribed rate of interest to parties against orders for supplies in  respect of projects aided/financed by bilateral or multilateral agencies/funds  (including World Bank, IBRD, IDA), as notified from time to time by Department  of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance under the Chapter "Deemed  Exports" in Foreign Trade Policy, which are eligible for grant of normal  export benefits by Government of India.
3.2
Packing  Credit provided should be adjusted from free foreign exchange representing  payment for the suppliers of goods to these agencies. It can also be  repaid/prepaid out of balances in Exchange Earners Foreign Currency account  (EEFC A/c), as also from the rupee resources of the exporter to the extent  supplies have actually been made.
3.3
Banks may also extend rupee
(i)  pre-shipment credit, and
(ii) post-supply  credit (for a maximum period of 30 days or upto the actual date of payment by  the receiver of goods, whichever is earlier),
For supply of goods specified as 'Deemed Exports'  under the same Chapter of Foreign Trade Policy from time to time.
3.4
The post-supply advances would be treated as  overdue after the period of 30 days. In cases where such overdue credits are  liquidated within a period of 180 days from the notional due date (i.e. before  210 days from the date of advance), the banks are required to charge, for such extended period, interest  prescribed for the category 'ECNOS' at post-shipment stage. If the bills are  not paid within the aforesaid period of 210 days, banks should charge from the  date of advance, the rate prescribed for 'ECNOS'-post-shipment.
3.5
Banks would be eligible for refinance from RBI for  such rupee export credits extended both at pre-shipment and post-supply stages.
4.
INTEREST ON RUPEE EXPORT CREDIT
4.1
General
For the period upto June 30, 2010, a ceiling rate had been prescribed  for rupee export credit linked to Benchmark Prime Lending Rates (BPLRs) of  individual banks available to their domestic borrowers. Banks had, therefore,  freedom to decide the actual rates to be charged within the specified ceilings.  Further, the ceiling interest rates for different time buckets under any category  of export credit should be on the basis of the BPLR relevant for the entire  tenor of export credit.
The  Base Rate System is applicable with effect from July 1, 2010. Accordingly, interest rates applicable for  all tenors of rupee export credit advances are at or above Base Rate.
ECNOS
ECNOS means Export Credit  Not Otherwise Specified in the Interest Rate structure for which banks are free  to decide the rate of interest keeping in view the Base Rate/BPLR guidelines.  Banks should not charge penal interest in respect of ECNOS.
4.2
Interest Rate on Rupee Export Credit
4.2.1
Interest Rate Structure
The  Base Rate System is applicable with effect from July 1, 2010. Accordingly, interest rates applicable for  all tenors of rupee export credit advances sanctioned on or after July 01, 2010  are at or above Base Rate.
4.2.2 Interest on  Pre-shipment Credit
The Base Rate System is applicable from July  1, 2010 and accordingly interest  rates applicable for all tenors of rupee export credit advances sanctioned on or after July 01, 2010 are  at or above Base Rate.
If pre-shipment advances are not liquidated  from proceeds of bills on purchase, discount, etc. on submission of export  documents within 360 days from the date of advance, or as indicated at para  1.1.4 (i) the advances will cease to qualify for prescribed rate of interest  for export credit ab initio.
In cases where packing credit is not  extended beyond the original period of sanction and exports take place after  the expiry of sanctioned period but within a period of 360 days from the date  of advance, exporter would be eligible for concessional credit only upto the  sanctioned period. For the balance period, interest rate prescribed for 'ECNOS'  at the pre-shipment stage will apply. Further, the reasons for non-extension of  the period need to be advised by banks to the exporter.
In cases where exports do not take place  within 360 days from the date of pre-shipment advance, such credits will be  termed as 'ECNOS' and banks may charge interest rate prescribed for 'ECNOS'  pre-shipment from the very first day of the advance.
If  exports do not materialise at all, banks should charge on relative packing  credit domestic lending rate plus penal rate of interest, if any, to be decided  by the banks on the basis of a transparent policy approved by their Board.
4.2.4
Interest  on Post-shipment Credit
Early payment of export bills
In the case of advances against demand  bills, if the bills are realised before the expiry of the normal transit period  (NTP), interest at the prescribed rate shall be charged from the date of  advance till the date of realisation of such bills. The date of realisation of  demand bills for this purpose would be the date on which the proceeds get  credited to the banks' Nostro accounts.
In the case of advance/credit against usance  export bills, interest at prescribed rate may be charged only upto the  notional/actual due date or the date on which export proceeds get credited to  the bank’s Nostro account abroad, whichever is earlier, irrespective of the  date of credit to the borrower's/exporter's account in India. In cases where  the correct due date can be established before/immediately after availment of  credit due to acceptance by overseas buyer or otherwise, prescribed interest  can be applied only upto the actual due date, irrespective of whatever may be  the notional due date arrived at, provided the actual due date falls before the  notional due date.
Where  interest for the entire NTP in the case of demand bills or upto notional/actual  due date in the case of usance bills as stated at (b) above, has been collected  at the time of negotiation/purchase/discount of bills, the excess interest  collected for the period from the date of realisation to the last date of  NTP/notional due date/actual due date should be refunded to the borrowers.
4.2.5
Overdue  Export Bills under the BPLR system
In case of export bills, the rate of  interest decided by the bank within the ceiling rate stipulated by RBI will  apply upto the due date of the bill (upto NTP in case of demand bill and specified  period in case of usance bills).
For  the period beyond the due date viz. for the overdue period, the prescribed  interest rate as applicable to post-shipment rupee export credit (not exceeding  BPLR minus 2.5 percentage points) may be applied upto 180 days from the date of  advance, till further notice.
4.2.6
Interest  on Post-shipment Credit Adjusted from Rupee Resources
Banks should adopt the following guidelines to  ensure uniformity in charging interest on post-shipment advances which are not  adjusted in an approved manner due to non-accrual of foreign exchange and  advances have to be adjusted out of the funds received from the Export Credit  Guarantee Corporation of India Ltd. (ECGC) in settlement of claims preferred on  them on account of the relevant export consignment:
In case of exports to certain countries,  exporters are unable to realise export proceeds due to non-expatriation of the  foreign exchange by the Governments/Central Banking Authorities of the  countries concerned as a result of their balance of payment problems even  though payments have been made locally by the buyers. In these cases ECGC offer  cover to exporters for transfer delays. Where ECGC have admitted the claims and  paid the amount for transfer delay, banks may charge interest as applicable to  'ECNOS'-post-shipment even if the post-shipment advance may be outstanding  beyond six months from the date of shipment. Such interest would be applicable  on the full amount of advance irrespective of the fact that the ECGC admit the  claims to the extent of 90 percent/75 percent and the exporters have to bring  the balance 10 percent/25 percent from their own rupee resources.
In a  case where interest has been charged at commercial rate or 'ECNOS', if export  proceeds are realised in an approved manner subsequently, the bank may refund  to the borrower the excess amount representing difference between the quantum  of interest already charged and interest that is chargeable taking into account  the said realisation after ensuring the fact of such realisation with  satisfactory evidence. While making adjustments of accounts it would be better  if the possibility of refund of excess interest is brought to the notice of the  borrower.
4.2.7
Change of Tenor of Bill
Banks have been permitted by RBI (FED) on request from exporters, to allow  change of the tenor of the original buyer/ consignee, provided inter alia, the  revised due date of payment does not fall beyond the maximum period prescribed  by FED for realization of export proceeds.
In  such cases as well as where change of tenor upto twelve months from the date of shipment has been  allowed, it would be in order for banks to extend the prescribed rate of  interest upto the revised notional due date, subject to the interest rates  Directive issued by RBI.
4.3
Rupee Export Credit Interest Rates Subvention
The rupee export credit interest rate subvention scheme was formulated  by the Government of India to alleviate the exporters’ concerns for which  operational instructions are issued by the Reserve Bank of India based on  advice from the Ministry of Finance, Government of India. The sectors /  sub-sectors to be included under the interest subvention facility are decided  by the Government.
In 2007, the Government of India  announced a package of measures to provide interest rate subvention of 2  percentage points per annum on rupee export credit availed of by exporters in  nine specified categories of exports,  viz., textiles (including handlooms), readymade garments, leather products,  handicrafts, engineering products, processed agricultural products, marine  products, sports goods and toys and to all exporters from the SME sector  defined as micro enterprises, small enterprises and medium enterprises for a  period from April 1, 2007 to September  30, 2008. The coverage was extended to  include jute and carpets, processed cashew, coffee and tea, solvent extracted  de-oiled cake, plastics and linoleum. Further, in respect of leather and  leather manufactures, marine products, all categories of textiles under the  existing scheme including Ready Made Garments and carpets but excluding  man-made fibre and handicrafts, the Govt. provided additional subvention of 2  per cent (in addition to the 2 per cent offered earlier) in pre-shipment credit  for 180 days and post-shipment credit for 90 days (for carpet sector, the  pre-shipment credit would be available for 270 days). Accordingly, banks would  charge interest rate not exceeding BPLR minus 4.5 / 6.5 per cent, as  applicable, on pre-shipment credit upto 180 days and post-shipment credit upto  90 days on the outstanding amount for the period April 1, 2007 to September 30,  2008. However, the total subvention will  be subject to the condition that the interest rate, after subvention will not  fall below 7 per cent which is the rate applicable to the agriculture sector  under priority sector lending.
In December 2008, the  Government of India announced the second scheme of interest subvention of 2  percentage points for certain employment oriented export sectors viz. Textiles  (including Handloom), handicrafts, carpets, leather, gems & jewellery,  marine products and Small and Medium Enterprises for the period December 1,  2008 to September 30, 2009. Accordingly,  banks would charge interest rate not exceeding BPLR minus 4.5 per cent on  pre-shipment credit upto 270 days and post-shipment credit upto 180 days on the  outstanding amount for the period December 1, 2008 to September 30, 2009. This  scheme was subsequently extended upto March 31, 2010.
In April 2010, the  Government of India announced the third scheme of interest rate subvention of 2  percentage points for certain employment oriented export sectors viz. Handicrafts, Carpets, Handlooms and Small &  Medium Enterprises (SME) for the period April 1, 2010 to March 31, 2011, subject to the condition that banks will charge interest rate not exceeding BPLR minus 4.5 percentage points on  pre-shipment credit upto 270 days and post-shipment credit upto 180 days on the  outstanding amount for the above period to these sectors. However, the total  subvention is subject to the condition that the interest rate, after subvention  will not fall below 7 per cent, which is the rate applicable to the  short term crop loan under priority sector lending.
In  August 2010, the Government of India decided to  extend interest rate subvention of 2 per cent on rupee export credit with  effect from April 1, 2010 to March 31, 2011 on the same terms and conditions to  certain additional sectors viz. Leather  and Leather Manufactures, Jute Manufacturing including Floor covering, Engineering  Goods and Textiles.
In October 2011, the Government of India announced  the fourth scheme of interest rate subvention of 2 percentage points for certain employment oriented export sectors  viz. Handicrafts, Handlooms, Carpets and SMEs.
In June 2012, the Government of India announced the  fifth scheme of interest rate subvention of 2 percentage points for certain employment oriented export sectors  viz; Handicrafts, Carpet, Handlooms, SMEs, Readymade Garments, Processed  Agriculture Products, Sport Goods and Toys.
In  January 2013, Government of India announced the sixth scheme of interest rate subvention of 2 percentage  points on the same terms and conditions for Handicrafts, Carpet, Handlooms,  Small & Medium Enterprises, Readymade Garments, Processed Agriculture  Goods, Sports Goods and Toys for the period April 1, 2013 to March 31,  2014. The scheme was also widened to include 134 tariff lines of engineering  products
(
Annex 4
)
on the same terms and conditions for the period
January  1, 2013 to March 31, 2014
.
In May  2013, the Government extended the 2 per cent interest rate subvention scheme to  a list of another 101 tariff lines in engineering goods sector
(
Annex 5
)
(in addition to the existing 134 tariff lines mentioned above) and 6 tariff  lines of textile good sector
(
Annex 6
)
on the same terms and conditions  for the period
April 1, 2013 to March 31, 2014
.
In  August 2013, the rate of interest subvention on the existing  sectors was increased from the present  2% to 3% with effect from August 1, 2013. Accordingly, banks have been advised  to pass on the benefit of 3% interest subvention completely to the eligible  exporters. This is for the period ending
March 31, 2014.
With  the change over to the Base Rate System, the interest rates applicable for all  tenors of rupee export credit advances with effect from July 1, 2010 are at or  above Base Rate in respect of all fresh/renewed advances as advised vide
circular DBOD. Dir.(Exp). BC. No. 102 /04.02.001/2009-10 dated May 6,  2010
. Accordingly, banks  should reduce the interest rate chargeable to the exporters as per the Base Rate System in the above  mentioned sectors eligible for export credit subvention by the amount of subvention available, subject  to a floor rate of 7 Per cent. If, as a  consequence, the interest rate charged to exporters goes below the Base Rate,  such lending will not be construed to be a violation of the Base Rate  guidelines.
Banks  are required to completely pass on the benefit of interest subvention, as  applicable, to the eligible exporters upfront and submit the claims to RBI for  reimbursement duly certified by the external auditor. The subvention would be  reimbursed by RBI on the basis of quarterly claims submitted by the banks in  the prescribed format.
PART-B
EXPORT CREDIT IN FOREIGN CURRENCY
5.1
Pre-shipment Credit in Foreign Currency (PCFC)
5.1.1
General
With a view to making credit available to exporters at internationally  competitive rates, authorised dealers have been permitted to extend  pre-shipment Credit in Foreign Currency (PCFC) to exporters for domestic and  imported inputs of exported goods at LIBOR/EURO LIBOR/EURIBOR related rates of  interest as detailed below:
5.1.2
Scheme
i. The scheme is an additional window for providing pre-shipment credit to  Indian exporters at internationally competitive rates of interest. It will be  applicable to only cash exports. The  instructions with regard to Rupee Export Credit apply to export credit in  Foreign Currency also mutatis mutandis, unless otherwise specified.
ii. The exporter will have the following options to avail of export finance:
to avail of pre-shipment  credit in rupees and then the post-shipment credit either in rupees or  discounting/ rediscounting of export bills under EBR Scheme mentioned in  paragraph 6.1.
to avail of pre-shipment  credit in foreign currency and discount/ rediscounting of the export bills in  foreign currency under EBR Scheme.
to avail of pre-shipment  credit in rupees and then convert drawals into PCFC at the discretion of the  bank.
iii. Choice of currency
The facility may be  extended in one of the convertible currencies viz. US Dollars, Pound Sterling,  Japanese Yen, Euro, etc.
To enable the exporters to  have operational flexibility, it will be in order for banks to extend PCFC in  one convertible currency in respect of an export order invoiced in another  convertible currency.
For example
, an exporter can avail of  PCFC in US Dollar against an export order invoiced in Euro. The risk and cost of cross currency  transaction will be that of the exporter.
Banks are permitted to extend PCFC for exports to ACU countries.
The applicable benefit to  the exporters will accrue only after the realisation of the export bills or  when the resultant export bills are rediscounted on ‘without recourse’ basis.
5.1.3
Source of funds for banks
i. The foreign currency balances available with the bank in Exchange  Earners Foreign Currency (EEFC) Accounts, Resident Foreign Currency Accounts  RFC(D) and Foreign Currency (Non-Resident) Accounts (Banks) Scheme could be  utilised for financing the pre-shipment credit in foreign currency.
ii. Banks are also permitted to utilise the foreign currency balances  available under Escrow Accounts and Exporters Foreign Currency Accounts for the  purpose, subject to ensuring that the requirements of funds by the account  holders for permissible transactions are met and the limit prescribed for  maintaining maximum balance in the account under broad based facility is not  exceeded.
iii. Foreign currency borrowings
In addition, banks may  arrange for borrowings from abroad. Banks may negotiate lines of credit with  overseas banks for the purpose of grant of PCFC to exporters without the prior  approval of the RBI, provided the rate of interest on the borrowing does not  exceed 250 basis points from November 15, 2011 over six months LIBOR/EURO LIBOR/EURIBOR.
Banks may avail of lines of credit  from other banks in India if  they are not in a position to raise loans from abroad on their own, provided the bank  does not have a branch abroad. The spread between the borrowing and lending  bank is left to the discretion of the banks concerned.
Banks are free to  determine the interest rates on export credit in foreign currency with effect  from May 5, 2012 vide our
circular DBOD.DIR.No. 100/04.02.001/2011 – 12  dated May 4, 2012
.
Banks should draw on the  line of credit arranged only to the extent of loans granted by them to the  exporters under the PCFC. However, where the overseas bank making available the  line of credit stipulates a minimum amount for drawals which should not be very  large, the small unutilised portion may be managed by the bank within its  foreign exchange position and Aggregate Gap Limit (AGL). Similarly, any  pre-payment by the exporter may also be taken within the foreign exchange  position and AGL limits.
iv. In case the exporters have arranged for the suppliers’ credit for  procuring imported inputs, the PCFC facility may be extended by the banks only  for the purpose of financing domestic inputs for exports.
v. Banks are also permitted to use foreign currency funds borrowed in terms  of para 4.2(i) of Notification No. FEMA.3/2000 RB dated May 3, 2000 as also  foreign currency funds generated through buy-sell swaps in the domestic forex  market for granting pre-shipment credit in Foreign Currency (PCFC) subject to  adherence to Aggregate Gap Limit (AGL) prescribed by RBI (FED).
5.1.4
Spread
Banks are free to determine the       interest rates on export credit in foreign currency with effect from May       5, 2012.
LIBOR / EURO LIBOR / EURIBOR rates are normally available for  standard period of 1, 2, 3, 6 and 12 months. Banks may quote rates on the basis  of standard period if PCFC is required for periods less than 6 months. However,  while quoting rates for non-standard period, banks should ensure that the rate  quoted is below the next upper standard period rate.
Banks may collect interest  on PCFC at monthly intervals against sale of foreign currency or out of  balances in EEFC accounts or out of discounted value of the export bills if  PCFC is liquidated.
5.1.5
Period of credit
The PCFC will be available for a maximum period of 360 days. Any  extension of the credit will be subject to the same terms and conditions as  applicable for extension of rupee packing credit.
Further extension will be subject to the terms and conditions  fixed by the bank concerned and if no export takes place within 360 days, the  PCFC will be adjusted at T.T. selling rate for the currency concerned. In such  cases, banks can arrange to remit foreign exchange to repay the loan or line of  credit raised abroad and interest without prior permission of RBI.
For extension of PCFC  within 180 days, banks are free to determine the interest rates on export  credit in foreign currency with effect from May 5, 2012.
5.1.6.
Export Credit in Foreign Currency to Protect Exporters from Rupee  Fluctuations
1. Banks extend export credit in Indian Rupees  as well as in foreign currency, such as Pre Shipment Credit in Foreign Currency  (PCFC) and Post Shipment Credit in Foreign Currency (PSCFC), as per their own  internal lending policies within the overall regulatory framework prescribed by  the Reserve Bank.
2 The export credit limits are calculated in  Indian Rupees and the limit is apportioned between Rupee and foreign currency  components depending upon the borrowers' requirement. While the overall export  credit limits are fixed in Indian Rupees, the foreign currency component of  export credit fluctuates based on the prevailing exchange rates.
3. It is observed that whenever there is a depreciation of Indian Rupee:
i. the unavailed foreign currency  component of export credit gets reduced;
ii.  the foreign currency component of export credit already availed gets revalued  at a higher value in terms of Indian Rupees resulting in the exporter being  asked to reduce their exposure by part payment or where the export credit limit  is not fully disbursed, the available limit for the borrower reduces, depriving  exporter of funds.
4. In above connection, a reference is invited to para 2.28 of the  Report of the Technical Committee on Services / Facilities for Exporters  (Chairman : Shri G. Padmanabhan) that the export finance limit is sanctioned by  Indian banks, who revalue the foreign currency borrowings like PCFC and PSCFC  on periodic (ranging from daily to monthly) basis, which results in notional  excess utilization over and above the sanctioned limits in case of weakening  Rupee. The Committee was of the view that denomination of facility in foreign  currency would ensure that exporters are insulated from Rupee fluctuations.
5. Banks are advised that they may compute the  overall export credit limits of the borrowers on an on-going basis say monthly,  based on the prevalent position of current assets, current liabilities and  exchange rates and re-allocate limit towards export credit in foreign currency,  as per the bank's own policy. This may result in increasing or decreasing the  Indian Rupee equivalent of foreign currency component of export credit.
6. Alternatively,  banks may denominate foreign currency (FC) component of export credit in  foreign currency only with a view to ensuring that the exporters are insulated  from Rupee fluctuations. The FC component of export credit, sanctioned,  disbursed and outstanding will be maintained and monitored in FC. However, for  translation of FC assets in the banks' book, the on-going exchange / FEDAI  rates may be used.
5.1.7
Disbursement of PCFC
In case full amount of PCFC or part thereof is utilised to finance  domestic input, banks may apply appropriate spot rate for the transaction.
As regards the minimum lots of transactions, it is left to the  operational convenience of banks to stipulate the minimum lots taking into  account the availability of their own resources. However, while fixing the  minimum lot, banks may take into account the needs of their small customers  also.
Banks should take steps to  streamline their procedures so that no separate sanction is needed for PCFC  once the packing credit limit has been authorised and the disbursement is not  delayed at the branches.
5.1.8
Liquidation of PCFC  Account
i.
General
PCFC can be liquidated out of proceeds of export documents on their  submission for discounting/rediscounting under the EBR Scheme detailed in para  6.1 or by grant of foreign currency loans (DP Bills). Subject to mutual  agreement between the exporter and the banker, it can also be repaid / prepaid  out of balances in EEFC A/c as also from rupee resources of the exporter to the  extent exports have actually taken place.
ii.
Packing credit in excess  of F.O.B. value
In certain cases, (viz. agro based products like HPS groundnut, defatted  & deoiled cakes, tobacco, pepper, cardamom, cashew nuts, ntc.) where  packing credit required is in excess of FOB value, PCFC would be available only  for exportable portion of the produce.
iii.
Substitution of  order/commodity
Repayment/liquidation of PCFC could  be with export documents relating to any other order covering the same or any  other commodity exported by the exporter or amount of balance in the EEFC  Account. While allowing substitution of contract in this way, banks  should ensure that it is commercially necessary and unavoidable. Banks should  also satisfy about the valid reasons as to why PCFC extended for shipment of a  particular commodity cannot be liquidated in the normal method. As far as  possible, the substitution of contract should be allowed if the exporter  maintains account with the same bank or it has the approval of the members of  the consortium, if any.
5.1.9
Cancellation/non-execution  of export order
In case of cancellation of the export order for which the PCFC was  availed of by the exporter from the bank, or if the exporter is unable to  execute the export order for any reason, it will be in order for the exporter  to repay the loan together with accrued interest thereon, by purchasing foreign  exchange (principal + interest) from domestic market through the bank. In such cases, interest will be payable on  the rupee equivalent of principal amount at the rate applicable to ECNOS at  pre-shipment stage plus a penal rate of interest from the date of advance after  adjustment of interest of PCFC already recovered.
It will also be in order  for the banks to remit the amount to the overseas bank, provided the PCFC was  made available to exporter from the line of credit obtained from that bank.
Banks may extend PCFC to  such exporters subsequently, after ensuring that the earlier cancellation of  PCFC was due to genuine reasons.
5.1.10.
Running Account  Facility for all commodities
i. Banks are permitted to extend the ‘Running Account’ facility under the  PCFC Scheme to exporters for all commodities, on the lines of the facility  available under rupee credit, subject to the following conditions:
The facility may be extended provided the need for ‘Running  Account’ facility has been established by the exporters to the satisfaction of  the bank.
Banks may extend the  facility only to those exporters whose track record has been good.
In all cases, where  pre-shipment credit ‘Running Account’ facility has been extended, the LCs or  firm orders should be produced within a reasonable period of time.
The PCFC will be  marked-off on the ‘First-in-First-Out’ basis.
PCFC can also be marked-off  with proceeds of export documents against which no PCFC has been drawn by the  exporter.
ii. Banks should closely monitor the production of firm order or LC  subsequently by exporters and also the end-use of funds. It has to be ensured  that no diversion of funds is made for domestic use. In case of non-utilisation  of PCFC drawals for export purposes, the penal provisions stated above should  be made applicable and the ‘Running Account’ facility should be withdrawn for  the concerned exporter.
iii. Banks are required to take any prepayment by the exporter under PCFC  scheme within their foreign exchange position and Aggregate Gap Limit (AGL) as  indicated in paragraph 5.1.3 (iii) (b) above. With the extension of ‘Running  Account’ facility, mismatches are likely to occur for a longer period involving  cost to the banks. Banks may charge the exporters the funding cost, if any,  involved in absorbing mismatches in respect of the prepayment beyond one month  period.
5.1.11
Forward Contracts
In terms of paragraph 5.1.2 (iii) above, PCFC can be extended in  any of the convertible currencies in respect of an export order invoiced in  another convertible currency. Banks are also permitted to allow an exporter to  book forward contract on the basis of confirmed export order prior to availing  of PCFC and cancel the contract (for portion of drawal used for imported  inputs) at prevailing market rates on availing of PCFC.
Banks are permitted to allow customers to seek cover in any  permitted currency of their choice which is actively traded in the market,  subject to ensuring that the customer is exposed to exchange risk in a  permitted currency in the underlying transaction.
While allowing forward  contracts under the scheme, banks may ensure compliance of the basic Foreign Exchange  Management requirement that the customer is exposed to an exchange risk in the  underlying transaction at different stages of the export finance.
5.1.12
Sharing of EPC under PCFC
The rupee export packing credit is allowed to be shared between an  export order holder and the manufacturer of the goods to be exported.  Similarly, banks may extend PCFC also to the manufacturer on the basis of the  disclaimer from the export order holder through his bank.
PCFC granted to the manufacturer can be repaid by transfer of  foreign currency from the export order holder by availing of PCFC or by  discounting of bills. Banks should ensure that no double financing is involved  in the transaction and the total period of packing credit is limited to the  actual cycle of production of the exported goods.
The facility may be  extended where the banker or the leader of consortium of banks is the same for  both the export order holder and the manufacturer or, the banks concerned agree  to such an arrangement where the bankers are different for export order holder  and manufacturer. The sharing of export benefits will be left to the mutual  agreement between the export order holder and the manufacturer.
5.1.13
Supplies from One EOU/EPZ/SEZ Unit  to another EOU/EPZ/SEZ Unit
PCFC may be made available to both, the supplier EOU/EPZ/ SEZ unit  and the receiver EOU/EPZ/ SEZ unit.
The PCFC for supplier EOU/EPZ/SEZ unit will be for supply of raw  materials/components of goods which will be further processed and finally exported  by receiver EOU/ EPZ / SEZ unit.
The PCFC extended to the  supplier EOU/EPZ/SEZ unit will have to be liquidated by receipt of foreign  exchange from the receiver EOU/EPZ/SEZ unit, for which purpose, the receiver  EOU/EPZ/SEZ unit may avail of PCFC.
The stipulation regarding liquidation of PCFC by payment in  foreign exchange will be met in such cases not by negotiation of export  documents but by transfer of foreign exchange from the banker of the receiver  EOU/EPZ/SEZ unit to the banker of supplier EOU/EPZ/SEZ unit. Thus, there will  not normally be any post-shipment credit in the transaction from the supplier  EOU/EPZ/ SEZ unit’s point of view.
In all such cases, it has  to be ensured by banks that there is no double financing for the same  transaction. Needless to add, the PCFC to receiver EOU/EPZ/SEZ unit will be  liquidated by discounting of export bills.
5.1.14 Deemed  Exports
PCFC may be allowed for ‘deemed exports’ only for supplies to projects financed by multilateral/bilateral  agencies/funds. PCFC released for ‘deemed exports’ should be liquidated by  grant of foreign currency loan at post-supply stage, for a maximum period of 30  days or upto the date of payment by the project authorities, whichever is  earlier. PCFC may also be repaid/ prepaid out of balances in EEFC A/c as also  from rupee resources of the exporter to the extent supplies have actually been  made.
5.1.15 Refinance
Banks will not be eligible for any refinance from RBI against export  credit under the PCFC scheme and, as such, the quantum of PCFC should be shown  separately from the export credit figures reported for the purpose of drawing  export credit refinance.
5.1.16
Other aspects
The applicable benefits such as credit of eligible percentage of  export proceeds to EEFC Account etc. to the exporters will accrue only after  realisation of the export bills and not at the stage of conversion of  pre-shipment credit to post-shipment credit (except when bills are discounted/  rediscounted 'without recourse').
Surplus of export proceeds available after adjusting relative  export finance and credit to EEFC account should not be allowed for setting off  of import bills.
ECGC cover will be available in rupees only, whereas PCFC is in  foreign currency.
For the purpose of  reckoning banks' performance in extending export credit, the rupee equivalent of  the PCFC may be taken into account.
5.2
Diamond Dollar Account (DDA) Scheme
Under the Foreign Trade Policy 2009-2014, firms/companies dealing in  purchase/sale of rough or cut and polished diamonds, diamond studded jewellery,  with good track record of at least two years in import or export of diamonds  with an annual average turnover of Rs. 3 crore or above during the preceding  three licensing years (from April to March) are permitted to carry out their  business through designated Diamond Dollar Accounts (DDAs).
Under the DDA Scheme, it would be in order for banks to liquidate PCFC  granted to a DDA holder by dollar proceeds from sale of rough, cut and polished  diamonds by him to another DDA holder. (For details regarding the Diamond  Dollar Accounts, bank may refer to AP (DIR series) circular No.13 dated October  29, 2009 issued by Foreign Exchange Department of RBI)
6.
Post-shipment Export  Credit in Foreign Currency
6.1
Rediscounting  of Export Bills Abroad Scheme (EBR)
6.1.1
General
Banks may utilise the foreign exchange resources available with them in  Exchange Earners Foreign Currency Accounts (EEFC), Resident Foreign  Currency Accounts (RFC),  Foreign Currency (Non-Resident) Accounts (Banks) Scheme, to  discount usance bills and retain them in their portfolio without resorting to  rediscounting. Banks are also allowed to  rediscount export bills abroad at rates linked to international interest rates  at post-shipment stage.
6.1.2
Scheme
i. It will be comparatively easier to have a facility against bills  portfolio (covering all eligible bills) than to have rediscounting facility  abroad on bill by bill basis. There will, however, be no bar if rediscounting  facility on bill to bill basis is arranged by a bank in case of any particular  exporter, especially for large value transactions.
ii. Banks may arrange a
"Bankers  Acceptance Facility" (BAF)
for rediscounting the export bills without  any margin and duly covered by collateralised documents.
iii. Each bank can have its own BAF limit(s) fixed with an overseas bank or a  rediscounting agency or an arrangement with any other agency such as factoring  agency (in case of factoring arrangement, it should be on ‘without recourse’  basis only).
iv. The exporters, on their own, can arrange for themselves a line of credit  with an overseas bank or any other agency (including a factoring agency) for  discounting their export bills direct subject to the following conditions:
(a) Direct discounting of  export bills by exporters with overseas bank and/or any other agency will be done  only through the branch of an authorized dealer designated by him for this  purpose.
(b) Discounting of export  bills will be routed through designated bank/ authorized dealerfrom  whom the packing credit facility has been availed of. In case, these are routed  through any other bank, the latter will first arrange to adjust the amount  outstanding under packing credit with the concerned bank out of the proceeds of  the rediscounted bills.
v. The limits granted to banks by overseas banks/discounting agencies under  BAF will not be reckoned for the purpose of borrowing limits fixed by RBI (FED)  for them.
6.1.3
Eligibility criteria
The Scheme will cover mainly export bills with usance period upto  180 days from the date of shipment (inclusive of normal transit period and  grace period, if any). There is, however, no bar to include demand bills, if  overseas institution has no objection to it.
In case borrower is eligible to draw usance bills for periods  exceeding 180 days as per the extant instructions of FED, Post-shipment Credit  under the EBR may be provided beyond 180 days.
The facility under the Scheme of Rediscounting may be offered in  any convertible currency.
Banks are permitted to extend the EBR facility for exports to ACU  countries.
For operational convenience,  the BAF Scheme may be centralised at a branch designated by the bank. There  will, however, be no bar for other branches of the bank to operate the scheme  as per the bank's internal guidelines / instructions.
6.1.4
Source of On-shore funds
In the case of demand  bills [subject to what has been stated in paragraph 6.1.3 (i) above], these may  have to be routed through the existing post-shipment credit facility or by way  of foreign exchange loans to the exporters out of the foreign currency balances  available with banks in the Schemes ibid.
To facilitate the growth  of local market for rediscounting export bills, establishment and development  of an active inter-bank market is desirable. It is possible that banks hold  bills in their own portfolio without rediscounting. However, in case of need,  the banks should also have access to the local market, which will enable the  country to save foreign exchange to the extent of the cost of rediscounting.  Further, as different banks may be having BAF for varying amounts, it will be  possible for a bank which has balance available in its limit to offer  rediscounting facility to another bank which may have exhausted its limit or  could not arrange for such a facility.
Banks may avail of  lines of credit from other banks in India if they are not in a position to  raise loans from abroad on their own or they do not have branches abroad
Banks are also  permitted to use foreign currency funds borrowed in terms of para 4.2(i) of
notification No. FEMA 3/2000 RB dated May 3, 2000
as also foreign currency  funds generated through buy - sell swaps in the domestic forex market for  granting facility of rediscounting of Export Bills Abroad (EBR) subject to  adherence to Aggregate Gap Limit (AGL) approved by RBI (FED).
6.1.5
Facility of  Rediscounting 'with recourse' and 'without recourse'
It is recognised that it will be difficult to get ‘without recourse’  facility from abroad under BAF or any other facility. Therefore, the bills may  be rediscounted ‘with recourse’. However, if an AD is in a position to arrange  ‘without recourse’ facility on competitive terms, it is permitted to avail  itself of such a facility.
6.1.6
Accounting aspects
The rupee equivalent of the discounted value of the export bills  will be payable to the exporter and the same should be utilised to liquidate  the outstanding export packing credit.
As the discounting of bills/extension of foreign exchange loans  (DP bills) will be in actual foreign exchange, banks may apply appropriate spot  rate for the transactions.
The rupee equivalents of discounted amounts/foreign exchange loan  may be held in the bank’s books distinct from the existing post-shipment credit  accounts.
In case of overdue bills, banks may charge interest from the due  date to the date of crystallization as per the  interest rate policy of the bank..
Interest rate as per RBI interest rate directive for post-shipment  credit in rupees will be applicable from the date of crystallisation.
In the event of export bill  not being paid, it will be in order for the bank to remit the amount equivalent  to the value of the bill earlier discounted, to the overseas bank/agency which  had discounted the bill, without the prior approval of the RBI.
6.1.7
Restoration of limits and availability of export  benefits such as EEFC Account
As stated in paragraph 6.1.5 above, ‘without recourse’ facility may not  generally be available. Thus, the restoration of exporter’s limits and the  availability of export benefits, such as credit to EEFC accounts, in case of  ‘with recourse’ facility,will be effected only on realisation of export  proceeds and not on the date of discounting/ rediscounting of the bills,  However, if the bills are rediscounted ‘without recourse’, the restoration of  exporter’s limits and availability of export benefits may be given effect  immediately on rediscounting.
6.1.8
ECGC cover
In the case of export bills rediscounted ‘with recourse’, there will not  be any change in the existing system of coverage provided by Export Credit  Guarantee Corporation (ECGC) as the liability of the exporter continues till  the relative bill is retired/paid. In other cases, where the bills are  rediscounted ‘without recourse’, the liability of ECGC ceases as soon as the  relative bills are rediscounted.
6.1.9
Refinance
Banks will not be eligible for refinance from the RBI against export  bills discounted/rediscounted under the Scheme and as such, the bills  discounted/rediscounted in foreign currency should be shown separately from the  export credit figures reported for purposes of drawing export credit refinance.
6.1.10.
Export credit performance
Only the bills rediscounted abroad ‘with recourse’ basis and  outstanding will be taken into account for the purpose of export credit  performance. The bills rediscounted abroad ‘without recourse’ will not count  for the export credit performance.
Bills rediscounted ‘with  recourse’ in the domestic market could get reflected only in the case of the first bank discounting the bills as  that bank alone will have recourse to the exporter and the bank rediscounting  will not reckon the amount as export credit.
7.
INTEREST ON EXPORT CREDIT  IN FOREIGN CURRENCY
7.1
Interest rate structure  on Export Credit in Foreign Currency
In respect of export credit to exporters at internationally competitive  rates under the schemes of 'Pre-shipment Credit in Foreign Currency' (PCFC) and  'Rediscounting of Export Bills Abroad' (EBR), banks are free to determine the  interest rates on export credit in foreign currency with effect from May 5,  2012.
PART -C
8.
CUSTOMER SERVICE  AND SIMPLIFICATION OF PROCEDURES
8.1
Customer Service
8.1.1
General
Banks may provide timely and adequate credit and also render  essential customer services/guidance in regard to procedural formalities and  export opportunities to their exporter clients.
Banks should open Export  Counsel Offices to guide exporters particularly the small ones and those taking  up non-traditional exports.
8.1.2
Working Group to review Export Credit
As part of the on-going efforts to address various issues relating to  customer service to exporters, the Reserve Bank of India had constituted a  Working Group in May 2005, consisting of select banks and exporters’  organizations to review Export Credit. The Group has come out with a  comprehensive set of recommendations most of which have been accepted and  communicated to banks. (
Annex 1
).
8.1.3
Gold Card Scheme for exporters
The Government (Ministry of Commerce and Industry), in consultation with  RBI had indicated in the Foreign Trade Policy 2003-04 that a Gold Card Scheme  would be worked out by RBI for creditworthy exporters with good track record  for easy availability of export credit on best terms. Accordingly, in  consultation with select banks and exporters, a Gold Card Scheme was drawn up.  The Scheme envisages certain additional benefits based on the record of  performance of the exporters. The Gold Card holder would enjoy simpler and more  efficient credit delivery mechanism in recognition of his good track record.  The salient features of the Scheme are:
All creditworthy exporters, including those in small and medium  sectors, with good track record would be  eligible for issue of Gold Card by individual banks as per the criteria to be  laid down by the latter.
Gold Card under the Scheme may be issued to all eligible exporters  including those in the small and medium sectors who satisfy the laid down  conditions.
The scheme will not be applicable for exporters blacklisted by  ECGC or having overdue bills in excess of 10% of the previous year’s turnover.
Gold Card holder exporters, depending on their track record and  credit worthiness, will be granted better terms of credit including rates of  interest than those extended to other exporters by the banks.
Applications for credit will be processed at norms simpler and  under a process faster than for other exporters.
Banks would clearly specify the benefits they would be offering to  Gold Card holders.
The charges schedule and fee-structure in respect of services  provided by banks to exporters under the Scheme will be relatively lower than  those provided to other exporters.
The sanction and renewal of the limits under the Scheme will be  based on a simplified procedure to be decided by the banks. Taking into account  the anticipated export turnover and track record of the exporter the banks may  determine need-based finance with a liberal approach.
'In-principle' limits will be sanctioned for a period of 3 years  with a provision for automatic renewal subject to fulfillment of the terms and  conditions of sanction.
A stand-by limit of not less than 20 per cent of the assessed  limit may be additionally made available to facilitate urgent credit needs for  executing sudden orders. In the case of exporters of seasonal commodities, the  peak and off-peak levels may be appropriately specified.
In case of unanticipated export orders, norms for inventory may be  relaxed, taking into account the size and nature of the export order.
Requests from card holders would be processed quickly by banks  within 25 days / 15 days and 7 days for fresh applications / renewal of limits  and ad hoc limits, respectively.
Gold Card holders would be given preference in the matter of  granting of packing credit in foreign currency.
Banks would consider waiver of collaterals and exemption from ECGC  guarantee schemes on the basis of card holder's creditworthiness and track  record.
The facility of further value addition to their cards through  supplementary services like ATM, Internet banking, International debit / credit  cards may be decided by the issuing banks.
The applicable rate of interest to be charged under the Gold Card  Scheme will not be more than the general rate for export credit in the  respective bank and within the ceiling prescribed by RBI. In keeping with the spirit of the Scheme,  banks will endeavour to provide the best rates possible to Gold Card holders on  the basis of their rating and past performance.
In respect of the Gold Card holders, the prescribed rate of  interest on post-shipment rupee export credit may be extended for a maximum  period upto 365 days.
Gold Card holders, on the basis of their track record of timely  realization of export bills, will be considered for issuance of foreign  currency credit cards for meeting urgent payment obligations, etc.
Banks may ensure that the PCFC requirements of the Gold Card  holders are met by giving them priority over non-export borrowers with regard  to granting loans out of their FCNR (B) funds, etc.
Banks will consider  granting term loans in foreign currency in deserving cases out of their FCNR  (B), RFC, etc. funds. (Banks may not grant such loans from their overseas  borrowings under the 25 per cent window of overseas borrowings.)
8.1.4
Delay in crediting the proceeds of export bills  drawn in foreign currency
Delays are observed in passing on the credit of export bills drawn in  foreign currency to the exporters after the foreign currency amounts are  credited to the ‘Nostro’ accounts of the banks.
Although there are instructions that the prescribed post-shipment  interest rate will cease from the date of credit to the 'Nostro' account, the  credit limits enjoyed by the exporters remain frozen till the actual date of  credit of rupee equivalent to the account of the customer. There is, therefore,  need to promptly restore the limit of the exporters on realisation of bills and  pass on the rupee credit to the customer.
8.1.5
Payment of compensation  to exporters for delayed credit of export bills
In respect of the delay in affording credit in respect of credit  advices complete in all respects, the compensation stipulated by FEDAI should  be paid to the exporter client, without waiting for a demand from the exporter.
Banks should devise a system to monitor timely credit of the  export proceeds to the exporter's account and payment of compensation as per  FEDAI rules.
The internal audit and  inspection teams of the banks should specifically comment on these aspects in  the reports.
8.2
Sanction of export credit  proposals
8.2.1
Time limit for sanction
The sanction of fresh/enhanced export credit limits should be made  within 45 days from the date of  receipt of credit limit application with the required details/information  supported by requisite financial/operating statements. In case of renewal of  limits and sanction of ad hoc credit facilities, the time taken by banks should  not exceed 30 days and 15 days respectively,  other than for Gold Card holders.
8.2.2
Ad hoc limit
At times, exporters require ad hoc limits to take care of large export  orders which were not foreseen earlier. Banks should respond to such situations  promptly. Apart from this, banks should adopt a flexible approach in respect of  exporters, who for genuine reasons are unable to bring in corresponding  additional contribution in respect of higher credit limits sought for specific  orders. No additional interest is  to be charged in respect of ad hoc limits granted by way of  pre-shipment/post-shipment export credit.
In cases where the export credit limits are utilised fully, banks may  adopt a flexible approach in negotiating the bills drawn against LCs and  consider in such cases delegating discretionary/higher sanctioning powers to  branch managers to meet the credit requirements of the exporters. Similarly  branches may also be authorized to disburse a certain percentage of the  enhanced/ad hoc limits, pending sanction by the higher  authorities/board/committee who had originally accorded sanctions to enable the  exporters to execute urgent export orders in time.
8.2.3
Other requirements
All rejections of export credit proposals should be brought to the  notice of the Chief Executive of the bank explaining the reasons for rejection.
The internal audit and inspection teams of the banks should  comment specifically on the timely sanction of export credit limits within the  time schedule prescribed by RBI.
The export credit limits should be excluded for bifurcation of the  working capital limit into loan and cash credit components.
Banks should nominate suitable officers as compliance officers in  their foreign departments/specialized branches to ensure prompt and timely  disposal of cases pertaining to exporters.
It is necessary to submit a  review note at quarterly intervals to the Board on the position of sanction of  credit limits to exporters. The note may cover among other things, number of  applications (with quantum of credit) sanctioned within the prescribed  time-frame, number of cases sanctioned with delay and pending sanction  explaining reasons therefor.
8.3
Simplification of procedure  for delivery of export credit in foreign currency and in rupees
8.3.1
General
With a view to ensuring timely delivery of credit to exporters and  removing procedural hassles, the following guidelines, applicable to rupee  export credit as well as export credit in foreign currency, may be brought into  effect.
8.3.2
Guidelines
i. Simplification of procedures
Banks should simplify the  application form and reduce data requirements from exporters for assessment of  their credit needs, so that exporters do not have to seek outside professional  help to fill in the application form or to furnish data required by the banks.
Banks should adopt any of the methods, viz. Projected Balance  Sheet method, Turnover method or Cash Budget method, for assessment of working  capital requirements of their exporter-customers, whichever is most suitable  and appropriate to their business operations.
In the case of consortium  finance, once the consortium has approved the assessment, member banks should  simultaneously initiate their respective sanction processes.
ii. 'On line' credit to exporters
Banks provide 'Line of  Credit' normally for one year which is reviewed annually. In case of delay in  renewal, the sanctioned limits should be allowed to continue uninterrupted and  urgent requirements of exporters should be met on ad hoc basis.
In case of established exporters  having satisfactory track record, banks should consider sanctioning a 'Line of  Credit' for a longer period, say, 3 years, with in-built flexibility to  step-up/step-down the quantum of limits within the overall outer limits  assessed. The step-up limits will become operative on attainment of  pre-determined performance parameters by the exporters. Banks should obtain  security documents covering the outer limit sanctioned to the exporters for  such longer period.
In case of export of  seasonal commodities, agro-based products, etc., banks should sanction Peak/Non-peak  credit facilities to exporters.
Banks should permit  interchangeability of pre-shipment and post- shipment credit limits.
Term Loan requirements for  expansion of capacity, modernization of machinery and up gradation of  technology should also be met by banks at their normal rate of interest.
Assessment of export credit  limits should be 'need based' and not directly linked to the availability of collateral security. As  long as the requirement of credit limit is justified on the basis of the  exporter's performance and track record, the credit should not be denied merely  on the grounds of non-availability of collateral security.
iii. Waiver of submission of orders or LCs for availing pre-shipment credit.
Banks should not insist on  submission of export order or LC for every disbursement of pre-shipment credit,  from exporters with consistently good track-record. Instead, a system of  periodical submission of a statement of LCs or export orders in hand should be  introduced.
Banks may waive,
ab initio
, submission of order/LC in  respect of exporters with good track record and put in place the system of  obtaining periodical statement of outstanding orders/LCs on hand. The same may  be incorporated in the sanction proposals as well as in the sanction letters  issued to exporters and appropriately brought to the notice of ECGC. Further,  if such waivers are permitted at a time subsequent to sanction of export credit  limits with the approval of the appropriate authority, the same may be  incorporated in the terms of sanction by way of amendments and communicated to  ECGC.
iv. Handling of export documents
Banks are required to obtain, among others, original sale  contract/confirmed order / proforma invoice countersigned by overseas buyer /  indent from authorized agent of overseas buyer for handling the export  documents as per Foreign Exchange Management regulations. Submission of such  documents need not be insisted upon at the time of handling the export  documents, since the goods have already been valued and cleared by the Customs  authorities, except in the case of transactions with Letters of Credit (LC)  where the terms of LC require submission of the sale contract / other  alternative documents.
v. Fast track clearance of export credit
At specialized branches  and branches having sizeable export business, a facilitation mechanism for  assisting exporter-customers should be put in place for quick initial scrutiny  of credit application and for discussions for seeking additional information or  clarifications.
Banks should streamline  their internal systems and procedures to comply with the stipulated time limits  for disposal of export credit proposals and also endeavour to dispose of export  credit proposals ahead of the prescribed time schedule. A flow chart indicating  chronological movement of credit application from the date of receipt till the  date of sanction should also accompany credit proposals.
Banks should delegate  higher sanctioning powers to their branches for export credit.
Banks should consider  reducing at least some of the intervening layers in the sanctioning process. It  would be desirable to ensure that the total number of layers involved in  decision-making in regard to export finance does not exceed three.
Banks should introduce a  system of 'Joint Appraisal' by officials at branches and administrative  offices, to facilitate quicker processing of export credit proposals.
Where feasible, banks  should set up a 'Credit Committee' at specialized branches and at administrative  offices, for sanctioning working capital facilities to exporters. The 'Credit  Committee' should have sufficiently higher sanctioning powers.
vi. Publicity and training
Generally, export credit at internationally competitive rates is  made available in foreign currency at select branches of banks. In order to make the scheme more popular and  considering the competitive interest rate on foreign currency loans and to  mitigate any possible exchange risk, exporters need to be encouraged to make  maximum use of export credit in foreign currency. Banks located in areas with concentration of  exporters should, therefore, give wide publicity to this important facility and  make it easily accessible to all exporters including small exporters and ensure  that more number of branches are designated for making available export credit  in foreign currency.
Banks may also arrange to publicise widely the facility of prescribed  interest rates being available for deemed exports and ensure that operating  staff are adequately sensitized in this regard.
Officers at operating level  should be provided with adequate training. In the matter of transfer of officials from critical branches dealing in  export credit, banks should ensure that the new incumbents posted possess adequate  knowledge/ exposure in the areas of forex as well as export credit to avoid  delays in processing/sanctioning of export credit limits and thereby subjecting  exporters to the risk of cancellation of export orders.
vii. Customer Education
Banks should bring out a  Hand Book containing salient features of the simplified procedures for sanction  of export credit in Foreign Currency at internationally competitive rates as  well as in Rupees for the benefit of their exporter-clients.
To facilitate interaction  between banks and exporters, banks should periodically organise Exporters' Meet  at centres with concentration of exporters.
8.3.3
Monitoring implementation of guidelines
Banks should ensure that exporters’ credit requirements are met in  full and promptly at competitive rates. The above referred guidelines must be  implemented, both in letter and spirit, so as to bring about a perceptible  improvement in credit delivery and related banking services to export sector.  Banks should also address the deficiencies, if any, in the mechanism of  deployment of staff in their organisations to eliminate the bottlenecks in the  flow of credit to the export sector.
Banks should set up an  internal team to visit branches periodically, say, once in two months to gauge  the extent of implementation of the Guidelines.
8.4
Constitution of a separate Sub-Committee under State Level Bankers’ Committee
Consequent upon the winding up of the State Level Export Promotion  Committee (SLEPC), issues relating to export finance and other bank related  issues at the state level will be taken up, henceforth, by a Sub-Committee of  the State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC). This Sub-Committee, known as  "Sub-Committee of SLBC for Export Promotion", would include local  exporters’ associations, the State Bank of India, two / three leading banks  handling sizeable export business, Directorate General of Foreign Trade,  Customs, State Government (Department of Commerce and Industry and Department  of Finance), the Export-Import Bank, Export Credit and Guarantee Corporation,  Foreign Exchange Dealers’ Association of India besides the Reserve Bank  (Foreign Exchange Department and Department of Banking Supervision) at the  regional level, as members.
The Sub-Committee is expected to meet at half-yearly  intervals, or earlier, if considered necessary. The convenor bank of the SLBC  would be the Convenor of the Sub-Committee in the respective states and the  meetings would be chaired by the Executive Director of the convenor bank. The intimation of the dates of convening  forthcoming meetings are communicated to all concerned well in advance so that  issues of the export sector are well addressed.
9.
REPORTING  REQUIREMENTS
9.1
Export  credit performance indicator for banks
9.1.1
Banks are required to reach a level of outstanding  export credit equivalent of 12 per cent of each bank's Adjusted Net Bank Credit  (ANBC)
1
.  Accordingly, the performance of banks is being reviewed by the RBI, DBOD,  Directives Division, (Export Credit) at
half yearly
intervals. The  performance of the banks in extending export credit will be assessed on the  basis of the quarterly data submitted by the banks to Reserve Bank of India, Department of Banking Supervision, Central Office, OSMOS  Division, Mumbai.
9.1.2
Banks should endeavour to reach a level of  export credit equivalent to 12 percent of the bank’s ANBC. Where banks have  already provided export credit to the extent of 12 percent, endeavour should be  made to increase the same to a higher level and ensure that there is no fall in  the ratio. No worthwhile export order should be denied export credit from the  banks.
9.1.3
Failure to achieve the stipulated level of export credit and or failure  to show a distinct improvement in export credit performance could invite  bank-specific policy responses which could include raising of reserve  requirements and withdrawal of refinance facilities. The Directives Division, (Export Credit),  Department of Banking Operations and Development, of the Reserve Bank of India  would closely monitor the export credit performance of the banks.
9.2
Quarterly  data of export credit disbursements
Banks should submit the export credit disbursement data on a quarterly  basis in the format given in Annex 2.  Banks should ensure that the statement reaches Reserve Bank of India, Department  of Banking Supervision, Central Office, OSMOS Division, Centre-1, World Trade  Centre, Cuffe Parade, Mumbai 400005 positively by the end of the month  following the quarter to which it relates.
10.
Pre-shipment credit  to Diamond Exporters - Conflict Diamonds - Implementation of Kimberley Process  Certification Scheme (KPCS)
Trading in conflict diamonds has been banned by U.  N. Resolutions Nos. 1173 and 1176 as the  conflict diamonds play a large role in funding the rebels in the civil war torn  areas of Sierra Leone. There is also a Prohibition  on the direct / indirect import of all rough diamonds from Sierra Leone  and Liberia in terms of UN Resolution No. 1306(2000) and 1343(2001)  respectively. India, among other countries, has adopted a UN mandated new Kimberley  Process Certification Scheme to ensure that no rough diamonds mined and  illegally traded enter the country. Therefore, import of diamonds into India  should be accompanied by Kimberley Process Certificate (KPC). Similarly,  exports from India should also be accompanied by the KPC to the effect that no  conflict/ rough diamonds have been used in the process. The KPCs would be  verified/validated in the case of imports/ exports by the Gem and Jewellery  Export Promotion Council. In order to ensure the implementation of Kimberley  Process Certification Scheme, banks should obtain an undertaking in the format  given in
Annex 3
from such of the clients who have been extended credit  for doing any business relating to diamonds.
ANNEX 1
(vide paragraph 8.1.2)
Recommendations of the Working Group to Review Export Credit
The Working Group to Review Export Credit has recommended several  measures to improve customer service. The recommendations which have been  accepted and communicated to the banks are given below:
(a)
Review of the existing  procedure for export credit
There is a need for attitudinal change in the approach of banks'  officials in dealing with small and medium exporters. Banks may take suitable steps in this regard.
Banks should put in place a control and reporting mechanism to  ensure that the applications for export credit especially from Small and Medium  Exporters are disposed of within the prescribed time frame.
While processing applications for Export Credit, banks should  raise all queries in one shot in order to avoid delays in sanctioning credit.
Small and Medium Exporters especially in the upcountry centers  should be properly trained by SSI / export organizations with technical  assistance from banks regarding correct filling up of forms.
Collateral security should not be insisted upon as far as  possible.
State Level Export  Promotion Committees (SLEPCs) which have been reconstituted as sub-committees  of the SLBCs should play a greater role in promoting coordination between banks  and exporters.
(b)
Review of the Gold Card  Scheme
Since the number of Gold Cards issued by banks was  low, banks were advised to speed up the process of issue of the cards to all  the eligible exporters especially the SME exporters and ensure that the process  is completed within a period of three months.
Simplified procedure for  issue of Gold Cards as envisaged under the scheme should be implemented by all  banks.
Banks may consider  exempting all deserving Gold Card holder exporters from the Packing Credit  Guarantee Sectoral Schemes of ECGC on the basis of their track record.
(c)
Review of export credit  for non-star exporters
Banks should post nodal officers at Regional / Zonal Offices major  branches for attending to credit related problems of SME exporters.
(d)
Review of other issues
The interest rates prescribed by RBI upto June 30, 2010 are  ceiling rates. Since the banks are at  liberty to charge lesser rates of interest, banks may consider extending export  credit at rates lesser than the ceiling rates prescribed by RBI.
Banks should give priority  for the foreign currency export credit requirements of exporters over foreign  currency loans to non-exporter borrowers.
ANNEX 3
(vide paragraph 10)
Annexure  to
Circular IECD No.13/04.02.02/2002-03 dated February 3, 2003
Undertaking from Diamond  Clients
Form of an undertaking to be obtained  by
banks from the clients who have been extended
credit for doing any business relating to diamonds
"I hereby undertake:
not to knowingly do any business in the conflict diamonds as have  been banned vide UN Security Council  Resolutions No. 1173, 1176 and 1343(2001) or the conflict diamonds which come  from any area in Africa including  Liberia controlled by forces rebelling against the legitimate and  internationally recognised Government of the relevant country.
not to do direct or  indirect import of rough diamonds from Sierra Leone and/or Liberia whether or  not such diamonds originated in Liberia in terms of UN Security Council  Resolution No.1306 (2000) which prohibits the direct or indirect import of all  rough diamonds from Sierra Leone and UN Security Council Resolution No.1343  (2001) which prevents such import of all rough diamonds from Sierra Leone and  UN Security Council Resolution No.1343(2001) which prevents such import from  Liberia.
to follow Kimberley Process  Certification Scheme for dealing in diamonds.
I am also giving my consent to the withdrawal of all my credit  entitlements, if at any time, I am found guilty of knowingly having conducted  business in such diamonds".
Annex 4
(vide para 4.3)
Annex to
circular DBOD.DIR(Exp).BC.No.69/ 04.02.001 /2012-13 dated January  14, 2013
.
Tariff Lines of Engineering    Products approved for Inclusion for Interest Subvention
Sl.    No.
ITC    (HS)
Description
1
7301
SHEET PILING OF IRON OR STEEL, WHETHER OR NOT DRILLED, PUNCHED OR MADE    FROM ASSEMBLED ELEMENTS; WELDED ANGLES, SHAPES
2
7309
RESERVRS & CONTAINRS FR ANY MATRL(OTHR THNCMPRSD / LIQD GAS)OF IRN /    STL-CAPCTY>300 LTR NOT FITD WITH MECHNCL / THERMAL EQUIPMEN
3
7310
TANKS, DRUMS ETC & SMLR CONTNRS FOR MATERLS (OTHR THN CMPRSD / LQFD    GAS)-CAPCTY<=300LTRNOT FITTED WTH MECHNCL OR THERML EQ
4
7311
CONTAINERS FOR COMPRESSED OR LIQUEFIED GAS, OF IRON OR STEEL
5
7314
CLOTH (INCLUDING ENDLESS BANDS), GRILL, NETTING AND FENCING, OF IRON OR    STEEL WIRE; EXPANDED METAL OF
6
7315
CHAIN AND PARTS THEREOF, OF IRON OR STEEL
7
7316
ANCHORS, GRAPNELS AND PARTS THEREOF, OF IRON OR STEEL
8
7317
NAILS, TACKS, DRAWING PINS, CORRUGATED NAILS,
9
7318
SCRWES, BOLTS, NUTS, COACHSCREWS, SCREW HOOKS RIVETS, COTTERS,    COTTER-PINS, WASHERS (INCL SPRING WASHERS) & SMLR ARTICLES OF IRN / STL
10
7319
SEWNG, KNITING NEEDLS,BODKINS,CROCHET BOOKSETC. & SMLR ARTCLS FOR USE    IN HAND,OF IRN / STL;SAFETY PINS & OTHR PINS NES / INCLU
11
7320
SPRINGS AND LEAVES FOR SPRINGS, OF IRON OR STEEL
12
7321
STOVS, RANGS, GRATS, COOKRS, BARBECUS, BRAZIRS GAS-RINGS, PLATE WARMRS    & SMLR NON- ELECTRICDOMESTC APPLIANCES & ITS PRTS OF I
13
7322
RADTRS FR CNTRL HTNG & ITS PRTS OF IRN / STLAIR HTRS & HT AIR    DSTRBTRS NT ELCTRCLY HTD,INCORPRTNG MOTOR DRIVN FAN & ITS PR
14
7323
TABLE KITCHN OR OTHR DOMESTIC ARTCLS & ITSPARTS OF IRN / STL; IRN OR    STL WOOL; SCOURERS OR POLISHNG PADS,GLOVS & LIKE OF
15
7324
SANITARY WARE AND PARTS THEREOF, OF IRON OR STEEL
16
7408
COPPER WIRE
17
7409
COPPER PLATES, SHEETS AND STRIP, OF A THICKNESS EXCEEDING 0.12.5 MM
18
7410
COPPER FOIL (W/N PRINTD OR BACKD WTH PAPR, PAPRBORD, PLSTCS OR SMLR    BACKING MATERLS) OF A THICKNESS (EXCL BACKING)<=0.15 MM
19
7411
COPPER TUBES AND PIPES
20
7412
COPR TUBE / PIPE FITNG (CUPLNGS, ELBOWS, SLEVS)
21
7413
STRANDED WIRE, CABLES, PLATED BANDS AND THE LIKE, OF COPPER, NOT    ELECTRICALLY INSULATED
22
7415
NAILS, TACKS, DRAWING PINS, STAPLES (OTHER THAN THOSE OF HEADING 8305)    AND SIMILAR ARTICLES, OF COPPER OR OF IRON OR STEEL
23
7418
TABLE, KITCHEN OR OTHER HOUSEHOLD ARTICLES AND PARTS THEREOF, OF COPPER;    POT SCOURERS AND SCOURING OR POLISHING PADS, G
24
7419
OTHER ARTICLES OF COPPER
25
7607
ALMNM FOIL(W/N PRNTD / BCKD WTH PAPR PAPRBOARD-PLSTCS ETC.) OF THCKNS    (EXCL ANY BCKNG) NT EXCDNG 0.2 MM
26
7611
ALMNM RSVRS, TNKS, VATS ETC. FR ANY MATRL (EXCL CMPRSSD GAS) OF    CPCTY>300L,W/N LND HT-INSLTD,BT NT FTD WTH MCHNL / THRML EQPMNT
27
7612
ALMNM CSKS, DRMS, CANS ETC(INCL CLPSBL TBLR CONTNRS) FR ANY MTRL(EXCL    GAS), OF<=300L,W/ NW/N LIND BUT NT FTD WTH MHCHNCL / THRML EQU
28
7613
ALMNM CONTAINERS FOR COMPRESSED / LQFD GAS
29
7614
STRANDED WIRE, CABLES, PLAITED BANDS AND THE LIKE, OF ALUMINIUM, NOT    ELECTRICALLY INSULATED
30
7615
TABL,KTCHN / OTHR HOUSLD ARTCLS & PRTS OF ALMNM, POT SCOURS &    SCOURNG / POLSHNG PADS GLOVS & TH LIKE, SNTRY WRE & PRTS OF ALMNM
31
8201
HND TOOLS LIKE SPADES, SHOVELS, HOES, FORKS AXES & SIMLR SEWING TOOLS    SECATRS-ANY KINDKNIVES, HEDGE SHEARS ETC USD IN AGR / FORSTRY
32
8202
HND SAWS; BLDES FOR SAWS OF ALL KINDS (INCLD SLITNG SLOTNG OR TOTHLES SAW    BLADES
33
8203
FILES, RASPS, PLIERS (INCLUDING CUTTING PLIERS), PINCERS, TWEEZERS, METAL    CUTTING SHEARS, PIPE-CUTTERS, BOLT CROPPERS
34
8204
HND OPRTED SPANERS & WRENCHS (INCLD TORQUE METER WRENCHS BUT NT TAP    WRENCHS); INTER CHANGBLE SPANER SOCKETS WTH HANDLE OR NOT
35
8205
HND TOOLS (INCLD GLAZIERS'DIAMONDS) N.E.S. BLOW LAMPS; VICES, CLAMPS,    OTHR THN ACSORS & PRTS OF MCHN TLS; ANVILS; PRTBLE FORGES ETC
36
8206
TOOLS OF TWO OR MORE OF THE HEADINGS 8202 TO 8205, PUT UP IN SETS FOR    RETAIL SALE
37
8207
INTRCHANGBL TOOLS FOR HND TOOLS W/N POWR OPERATD OR FOR MACHIN TOOL(E.G.    FOR PRESNG STAMPING ETC.) DIES FR DRILNG / BORNG TOOLS
38
8208
KNIVES AND CUTTING BLADES, FOR MACHINES OR FOR MECHANICAL APPLIANCES
39
8209
PLTES STIKS TIPS & LIKE FOR TLS, UNMOUNTD OF CERMETS
40
8210
HND-OPRETD MCHNCL APPLNCS WEIGHNG <=10KG. USED IN PRPRNG,CONDITNG,    SERVNG FOOD / DRINK
41
8211
KNIVS WTH CUTNG BLADES, SERATD OR NT (INCL PRUNING KNIVES) OTHER THAN    KNIVES OF HDG NO.8208 & BLADES THEREFOR
42
8212
RAZORS AND RAZOR BLADES (INCLUDING RAZOR BLADE BLANKS IN STRIPS)
43
8213
SCISORS TAILR'S SHEARS & SIMLR SHEARS & BLADES THEREFOR
44
8214
OTHER ARTICLES OF CUTLERY (FOR EXAMPLE, HAIR CLIPPERS, BUTCHERS OR    KITCHEN CLEAVERS, CHOPPERS AND MINCING KNIVES, PAP
45
8215
SPOONS, FORKS, LADLES, SKIMMERS, CAKE- SERVERS, FISHKNIVES,    BUTTER-KNIVES, SUGAR TONGS AND SIMILAR KITCHEN OR TABLEWARE
46
8402
STM / OTHR VAPR GNRTNG BOILRS (EXCL CNTRL HTNG HOT WATER BOILRS CPBL ALSO    OF PRDCNG LOW PRESSURE STEAM);SUPER-HEATD WTR BOILRS
47
8403
CNTRL HTNG BOILRS EXCL OF HDG NO.8402
48
8404
AXLRY PLNT,USD WTH BOILRS OF HDG NO.8402 / 8403(E.G. ECNMSRS, SUPR-HTRS,    SOOT-RMVR, GAS-RCVR); CNDNSR FR STM / OTHR VPR POWR UNIT
49
8405
PRDCR / WTR GAS GNRTRS, ACETLEN GAS GNRTRS & SMLR WTR PRCS GNRTRS,    W/N WTH THEIR PURIFRS
50
8406
STEAM TURBINES AND OTHER VAPOUR TURBINES
51
8410
HYDRAULIC TURBINES, WATER WHEELS, ANDREGULATORS THEREFOR
52
8411
TURBO-JETS, TURBO-PROPELLERS AND OTHER GAS TURBINES
53
8415
AIRCONDTNG MCHNS, CMPRSNG MOTR-DRVN FAN & ELMNTS FR CHNG TMPRTR &    HUMDTY, INCL THOSE MCHNS IN WHCH HUMDTY CANNT BE SPRTLY RGLT
54
8416
FURNC BURNRS FR LIQUID FUEL,FR PULVRSD SOLID FUEL / FR GAS; MCHNCL    STOKRS, MCHNCL GRTS, MCHNCL ASH DISCHRGS & SMLR APPLNCS
55
8417
INDUSTRIAL OR LABORATORY FURNACES AND OVENS, INCLUDING INCINERATORS, NON-    ELECTRIC
56
8418
RFRGRTRS, FRZRS & OTHR RFRGRTNG / FRZNG EQPMNT, ELCTRC / OTHR;HT    PUMPS EXCL AIR CONDTNG MCHNS OF HDG NO.8415
57
8419
MCHNRY, PLNT / LABORATORY EQPMNT, W/N ELCTRCLYHEATD, FR HEATNG, COOKNG,    ETC,EXCL MCHNRY FR DOMSTC PURPS; STORG WTR HEATRS, NON-ELCTRC
58
8420
CALENDERING OR OTHER ROLLING MACHINES, OTHER THAN FOR METALS OR GLASS,    AND CYLINDERS THEREFOR
59
8421
CENTRIFUGES, INCLUDING CENTRIFUGAL DRYERS; FILTERING OR PURIFYING    MACHINERY AND APPARATUS, FOR LIQUIDS OR GASES
60
8422
DISH WASHING MACHINES; MACHINERY FOR CLEANING OR DRYING BOTTLES OR OTHER    CONTAINERS; MACHINERY FOR FILLING, CLOSING
61
8423
WEIGHING MACHINERY (EXCLUDING BALANCES OF A SENSITIVITY OF 5 CENTIGRAMS    OR BETTER), INCLUDING WEIGHT OPERATED COUNTING OR CHEC
62
8424
MCHNCL APPLNCS (W/N HND-OPRTD) FR PRJCTNG, DSPRSNG LQDS / PWDR; FIRE    EXTNGSHR, W/N CHRGD; SPRY GUNS & LIKE; STM / SND BLSTNG & SMLR MCHNS
63
8425
PULLEY TACKLE AND HOISTS OTHER THAN SKIP HOISTS;
64
8432
AGRCLTRL, HRTCLTRL / FRSTRY MCHNRY FR SOIL PRPRTION / CLTVTN; LAWN /    SPRTS-GRND RLLRS
65
8433
HRVSTNG / THRSHNG MCHNRY INCL STRAW / FODR BLRS; GRASS MOWRS; MCHNS FR    CLNG, SRTNG EGGS, FRUIT / OTHR SMLR PRDC EXCL MCHNRY OF 8437
66
8434
MILKING MACHINES AND DAIRY MACHINERY
67
8435
PRSSES, CRSHRS & SMLR, MCHNRY USD IN MNFCTR OF WINE, CIDER, FRUIT    JUICES / SMLR BVRGS
68
8436
OTHR AGRCLTRL, HRTCLTRL, POLTRY / BEE-KEEPNG MCHNRY INCL GRMNTN PLNT FTTD    WTH MCHNCL / THRML EQPMNT; POLTRY INCUBTRS & BROODRS
69
8437
MCHN FR CLNG, SRTNG SEED, GRAIN / LGMNS VGTBL; MCHNRY FOR MLNG INDSTRY /    FR WRKNG OF CRL / DRIED LGMNS VEGTBLS, EXCL FARM-TYPE MCHNRY
70
8438
MCHNRY, N.E.S., FR INDSTRL PRPTN / MNFCTR OF FOOD / DRNK, EXCL MCHNRY FR    EXTRCTN / PRPRTN OFANML / FXD VGTBL FATS / OILS
71
8439
MCHNRY FR MKNG PULP OF FIBROUS CELLULOSIC MTRL / FR MKNG / FNSHNG PAPER /    PAPERBOARD
72
8440
BOOK-BINDING MACHINERY, INCLUDING BOOK-SEWING MACHINES
73
8441
OTHER MACHINERY FOR MAKING UP PAPER PULP, PAPER OR PAPERBOARD, INCLUDING    CUTTING MACHINES OF ALL KINDS
74
8442
MCHNRY, APPRTS & EQPMNT (EXCL OF 8456 TO 8465), FR TYPE-FOUNDNG /    TYPE-STTNG, FR PRPRNG PRNTNG BLKS, PLTS ETC; BLKS FR PRNTNG
75
8443
PRINTNG MACHNRY, INCL INK-JET PRINTNG MCHNSEXCL HDNG. NO 8471; MCHNS FR    USES ANCILARY TO PRINTNG.
76
8444
MCHNS FR EXTRUDING, DRAWING, TEXTURING OR CUTTING MAN-MADE TEXTILE    MATERIALS
77
8445
MCHNS FR PRPRNG TXTL FBRS; SPNG, TWSTNG ETC MCHNRY FR PRDCNG TXTL YRNS;    MCHNS FR PRPRNGTXTL YRNS FR USE ON MCHNS OF 8446/8447
78
8446
WEAVING MACHINES (LOOMS)
79
8447
KNTNG MCHNS, STCH-BNDNG MCHNS & MCHNS FR MKNG GMPD YRN, TULLE, LACE,    EMBRDRY,TRMMNG, BRAID / NET & MCHNS FR TFTNG
80
8448
AUXLRY MCHNRY USD WTH MCHNS OF HDG 8444, 8445,8446 / 8447; PRTS &    ACCSSRS USD WTH THIS HDG / OF HDG 8444,8445,8446 / 8447
81
8449
MCHNRY FR MNFCTR OF FINSHNG OF FELT OR NON-WOVNS IN PIECE / IN SHAPS,    INCL MCHNRY FRMKNG FELT HATS, BLOCKS FR MKNG HATS
82
8450
HOUSEHOLD OR LAUNDRY-TYPE WASHING MACHINES, INCLUDING MACHINES WHICH BOTH    WASH AND DRY
83
8451
0THER PARTS OF HOUSEHOLD LAUNDRY TYPE MCHNETC & MCHNS FR APPLYNG PST    TO BASE FBRC ETC; MCHNS FR RLNG, UNRLNG, FLDNG / CTTNG TXTL FBRC
84
8452
SEWNG MCHNS, EXCL BOOK-SEWNG MCHNS OF HDG NO 8440; FURNTR, BASES &    COVRS SPCLY DSGND FOR SEWNG MCHNS; SEWNG MCHNS NEDLS
85
8453
MCHNRY FR PREPARING,TANG / WRKNG HIDES, SKINS / LTHR / FR MKNG / REPAIRNG    FOOTWEAR / OTHR ARTCLS OF HIDES, SKINS ETC EXCL SEWNG MCHNS
86
8454
CNVRTRS, LADLS, INGOT MOULDS & CASTNG MCHNS USD IN METALLURGY / IN    METAL FOUNDRIES
87
8455
METAL-ROLLING MILLS AND ROLLS THEREFOR
88
8456
MCHN-TOLLS FR WRKNG ANY MATRL BY RMVL OF MATRL, BY LASR / OTHR LIGHT /    PHOTN BEAM, ULTRSONC ELCTRO-DSCHRG, ELCTRO-CHMCL,ETC
89
8457
MACHINING CENTRES, UNIT CONSTRUCTION MACHINES (SINGLE STATION) AND MULTI-    STATION TRANSFER MACHINES FOR WORKING META
90
8458
LATHES (INCLUDING TURNING CENTRES) FOR REMOVING METAL
91
8459
MCHN-TOOLS (INCL WAY-TYPE UNIT HEAD MCHNS) FR DRLLNG, BORNG, MLLNG,    THRDNG / TAPNG BY REMOVNG MTL, EXCL LATHS OF HDG NO. 8458
92
8460
MCHN-TOOLS FR DBURNGS, SHRPNG, GRNDNG, HNING POLSHNG / OTHRWS FINSNG MTL    ETC, CRMTS BY GRNDNG STONS, GEAR GRNDNG MCHNS OF HDG NO.8
93
8461
MCHN-TOOLS FR PLNING, SHAPNG, SLOTNG, BROCHNG GEAR CUTNG / GRNDNG /    FINSNG ETC WRKNG BY REMOVNG MTL, CERMETS N.E.S. / INCLUDED
94
8462
MCHN-TLS FR WRKNG MTL BY FORGN, HAMMRNG / DIE-STMPNG; FR WRKG MTL BY    BENDNG, FOLDNG, ETC; PRSSES FR WRKNG MTL / MTL CRBDS, NES
95
8463
OTHER MACHINE-TOOLS FOR WORKING METAL, OR CERMETS, WITHOUT REMOVING    MATERIAL
96
8464
MCHN-TOOLS FR WRKNG STONE, CERAMICS, CONCRETE, ASBESTOS-CEMENT / LIKE    MNRL MTRLS OR FR COLD WRKNG GLASS
97
8465
MCHN-TOOLS (INCL MCHNS FR NAILNG, STAPLNG, GLUENG / OTHRWS ASSEMBLNG) FR    WRKNG WOOD, CORK, BONE, HARD RUBBER, HARD PLASTICS ETC
98
8466
PRTS & ACCSSRS SUITBL FR USE WTH MCHNS OF HDG NOS8456 TO 8465,INCL    WRK / TOOL HOLDRS, SLF-OPENG DIEHEADS, ETC; TOOL HOLDRS
99
8467
TOOLS FOR WORKING IN THE HAND, PNEUMATIC, HYDRAULIC OR WITH    SELF-CONTAINED ELECTRIC OR NON-ELECTRIC MOTOR
100
8468
MCHNRY & APPRTS FR SOLDRNG, BRAZNG / WELDNG, W/N CPBL OF CUTNG, EXCL    OF HDG NO. 8515; GAS-OPERTD SURFACE TAMPRN MCHNS & APPLNCS
101
8474
MCHNRY FR SORTNG, SCRENG, SEPARTNG, WASHNG, CRSHNG ETC OF MNRL SUBSTNCS,    IN SOLID FORM MCHNS FR SHPNG MNRL FUEL & FRMNG MLDS OF
102
8475
MCHNS FR ASSMBLNC ELCTRC / ELCTRNC LAMPS, TUBES / VALVE / FLASH-BULBS, IN    GLASS ENVELOPS, MCHNS FR MNFCTRNG / HT WRKNG GLASS / GLASSWAR
103
8476
AUTOMTC GOODS-VENDNG MCHNS (E.G. POSTAGE STAMP, CIGARETTE, FOOD /    BEVERAGE MCHNS), INCL MONEY CHNGNG MCHNS
104
8480
MOULDING BOXES FOR METAL FOUNDRY; MOULD BASES; MOULDING PATTERNS; MOULDS    FOR METAL (OTHER THAN INGOT MOULDS), METAL CARBIDES
105
8504
ELECTRICAL TRANSFORMERS, STATIC CONVERTERS (FOR EXAMPLE, RECTIFIERS) AND    INDUCTORS
106
8505
ELCTRO-MGNT; PRMNENT MGNTS & ARTCLS TO MAKEPRMNENT MGNT; ELCTRO MGNTC    / PRMNENT DEVICS ELCTRO MGNTC CLTCHS,BRKS & LFTNGH
107
8507
ELCTRC ACCUMLTRS, INCL SEPARATORS THEREFOR W/N RECTANGULAR (INCL SQ)
108
8508
VACUUM CLEANERS
109
8509
ELCTRO-MECHNCL DOMESTIC APPLIANCES WTH SELF-CONTAINED ELCTRC MOTOR
110
8510
SHAVERS, HAIR CLIPPERS AND HAIR-REMOVING APPLIANCES, WITH SELF-CONTAINED    ELECTRIC MOTOR
111
8514
INDSTRL / LABORATORY ELCTRC (INCL INDUCTN / DIELCTRC) FURNACES ETC; OTHR    INDSTRL / LABORATORY INDUCTN / DIELCTRC HTNG EQPMNTS
112
8515
ELCTR (INCL ELCTACLLY HTD GAS) LASER / OTHR LIGHT / PHOTON BEAM ETC,    BRZNG / SLDRNG MCHNS ETC FR HOT SPRYNG OF MTLS / CERMETS
113
8516
ELCTRC WTR & IMRSN HTR; ELCTRC SPACES & HTNG APRTS; ELCTRO THRMIC    HAIR DRSSNG APRTS & HND DRYRS; SMLR ELCTRC APLNCS FR DMSTC USE
114
8518
MCROPHONES & STNDS THRFR; LOUDSPKR, W/N MNTD HEADPHONE, EARPHONE    & COMBND MCROPHONE / SPKRSETS; AUDIO FRQNCY AMPLFYR; SND AMPLFYR SETS
115
8519
TURNTABLES (RECORDDECKS) RECORD-PLAYERS CASSETTE PLAYERS ETC NT    INCORPORATING A SOUND RECORDING DEVICE
116
8521
VIDEO RECORDING OR REPRODUCING APPARATUS, WHETHER OR NOT INCORPORATING A    VIDEO TUNER
117
8522
PRTS & ACSSRS OF APPRTS OF HDGS NOS. 8519 TO 8521
118
8525
TRNSMISN APARATS FR RADIO, TELEPHNY ETC W/N INCRPRTNG RECEPTION APPRTS /    SOUND RECORDING / REPRDCNG APPRTS; TV CAMERAS ETC
119
8526
RADAR APPARATUS, RADIO NAVIGATIONAL AID APPARATUS AND RADIO REMOTE    CONTROL APPARATUS
120
8527
RECEPTION APPARATUS FOR RADIO-BROADCASTING WHETHER OR NOT COMBINED, IN    THE SAME HOUSING, WITH SOUND RECORDING OR REPRODUCI
121
8528
RECEPTION APARATUS,WH / NOT INCORPRTNG RADIOBRODCST RECIVRS / SOUND /    VIDEO RCORDNG / REPRODUCING APARATUS, VIDEO MONITORS ETC
122
8529
PRTS SUITBL FR USE SOLELY / PRNCPLLY WTH APPRTS OF HDGS NOS 8525 TO 8528
123
8531
ELCTRC SOUND / VISUAL SIGNLLNG APPRTS (E.G. BELLS SIRENS ETC.) OTHR THN    THOSE OF HDG NO.8512/8530
124
8532
ELCTRCL CAPACITORS FIXD, VARIABLE / ADJUSTABLE (PRE-SET)
125
8533
ELCTRCL RESISTORS (INCL RHEOSTATS & POTENTIOMETERS) OTHR THN HTNG    RESISTORS
126
8535
ELCTRCL APPRTS FR SWTCHNG / PROTCTNG ELCTRCLCIRCUITS ETC.(E.G. SWTCHS,    FUSES, LIGHTNING ARRESTERS ETC) FR A VLTG EXCDG 1000 VOLTS
127
8536
ELCTRCLS APPRTS FR SWTCHNG / PRTCTNG ELCTRCLCIRCUITS ETC. (E.G. SWTCHS    RELAYS ETC.) FOR A VOLTAGE NOT EXCDG 1000 VOLTS
128
8537
BORDS PANLS ETC EQUIPD WTH TWO OR MORE APPRTS OF HDG 8535 / 8536,INCL    THOSE INCORPRTNG INSTRMNTS / APPRTS OF CH 90
129
8538
PRTS SUITBL FR USE SOLELY / PRINCIPALLY WTH THE APPRTS OF HDG    NO.8535,8536 / 8537
130
8539
ELECTRIC FILAMENT OR DISCHARGE LAMPS, INCLUDING SEALED BEAM LAMP UNITS    AND ULTRA-VIOLET OR INFRA-RED LAMPS; ARC-LAMPS
131
8540
THERMIONIC COLD CATHODE / PHOTO-CATHODE VALVES & TUBES (E.G. VACUUM /    VAPOUR / GAS FILLED VALVES TUBES ETC.)
132
8541
DIODES, TRANSISTORS AND SIMILAR SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES; PHOTOSENSITIVE    SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES, INCLUDING PHOTOVOLT
133
8542
ELCTRNC INTEGRTD CIRCUITS & MICRO-ASSMBLS
134
8543
ELCTRCL MCHNS & APPRTS, HVNG INDIVIDUAL FNCTNS N.E.S. IN THIS CHAPTER
Annex 5
(vide paragraph 4.3)
Annex to
circular DBOD.DIR.BC.No.93/ 04.02.001 /2012-13 dated May 24,  2013
.
Export of Engineering items (4-digit ITCHS wise) for the year 2012-13
ITC    (HS)
Description    of Items
1
6601
UMBRLS & SUN-UMBRLS (INCL WLKNG-STCK UMBRLS GRDN UMBRLS & SMLR    UMBRLS)
2
7216
ANGLS, SHAPES & SCTNS OF IRON / NON-ALLOY STL
3
7217
WIRE OF IRON OR NON-ALLOY STEEL
4
7218
STAINLESS STEEL IN INGOTS OR OTHER PRIMARY FORMS; SEMI-FINISHED PRODUCTS    OF STAINLESS STEEL
5
7219
FLT-RLLD PRDCTS OF STAINLESS STL OF WDTH>=600 MM
6
7221
BARS AND RODS, HOT-ROLLED, IN IRREGULARLY WOUND COILS, OF STAINLESS STEEL
7
7223
WIRE OF STAINLESS STEEL
8
7225
FLT-RLLD PRDCTS OF OTHR ALLOY STL OF WDTH 600 MM OR MORE
9
7226
FLT-RLD PRDCTS OF A WIDTH OF <600 MM
10
7228
OTHR BARS, RODS, ANGLS, SHPS, SCTNS OF OTHR ALLOY STL, HOLLOW DRILL BARS    & RODS OF ALLOY OR NON-ALLOY STL
11
7302
RLY & TRMY TRACK CONSTRCTN MATRL OF IRON OR STL, E. G.RALS, RACK RALS    ETC SWTCH BLADS SLEEPRS, TIES & OTHR MATRL FOR FIXNG RAILS
12
7407
COPPER BARS, RODS AND PROFILES
13
7604
ALUMINIUM BARS, RODS AND PROFILES
14
7605
ALUMINIUM WIRE
15
7606
ALMNM PLTS, SHTS & STRP OF THCKNS>0.2 MM
16
7608
ALUMINIUM TUBES AND PIPES
17
7609
ALUMINIUM TUBE OR PIPE FITTINGS (FOR EXAMPLE, COUPLINGS, ELBOWS, SLEEVES)
18
7610
ALMNM STRCTRS & PRTS OF STRCTRS (BRDGS TOWRS,ROOFS ETC.) ALMNM    PLATES-RODS PROFILES ETC. PRPD FOR USE IN STRCTR
19
7616
OTHER ARTICLES OF ALUMINIUM
20
8301
PDLCKS LOCKS (KEY ETC) OF BASE MTL; CLSPS & FRMS WTH CLSPS, INCRPRTNG    LCKS, OF BASE MTL; KEYS FOR FRGNG ARTCLS OF BASE METAL
21
8302
BASE METAL MOUNTINGS, FITTINGS AND SIMILAR ARTICLES SUITABLE FOR    FURNITURE, DOORS, STAIRCASES, WINDOWS, BLINDS, COACHWORK, SA
22
8303
ARMORD / REINFRCD SAFES STRONG BOXS & DOORS & SAFE DPOST LCKRS FR    STRNG ROOMS CSH / DEEDBOXS ETC OF BASE METAL
23
8304
FILING, CABINETS, CARD-INDEX CABINETS, PAPER TRAYS, PAPER RESTS, PEN    TRAYS, OFFICE-STAMP STANDS AND SIMILAR OFFICE OR
24
8305
FITNGS FR LOOSE LEAF BINDRS / FILS LETR CLPSLETR CRNRS PAPR CLPS INDXNG    TGS & SMLR OFFCE ARTCLS STPLS IN STRIPS OF BS MTL
25
8306
BELS GONGS & THE LIKE NON ELCTRC OF BSE METL STATUETTES ETC OF BSE    METL PHOTGRPH PICTR, FRMS, MIRRORS ETC OF BSE METL
26
8307
FLXBL TUBNG OF BSE METL WTH / WTHOUT FTNGS
27
8308
CLASPS, FRAMES WITH CLASPS, BUCKLES, BUCKLE-CLASPS, HOOKS, EYES, EYELETS    AND THE LIKE, OF BASE METAL, OF A KIND USED FO
28
8309
STPPRS, CAPS ETC INCL CROWN CORKS, SCRW CAPSETC CAPSLS FR BOTLS, THRD    BUNGS, BUNG COVRS, SEALS & OTHR PCKNG ACCSSRS, OF BS MTL
29
8310
SIGN PLTS, NAME PLTS, ADDRS PLTS & SMLR PLTSNUMBRS, LTTRS &    SYMBOLS, OF BS MTL EXCLD OF HDG NO.9405
30
8311
WIRE, RODS, ELCTRDS ETC OF BS MTL / MTL CRBIDSCOATD / CORED WTH FLX MTRL    FR SLDRNG BRAZNG ETC OF MTL / MTL CRBDS WIRE ETC FR MTL SPRNG
31
8401
NUCLEAR REACTRS; FUEL ELMNTS (CARTRIDGES), NON-IRRADIATED, FR NUCLR    REACTRS; MCHNRY AND APPARATUS FOR ISOTOPIC SEPARATION
32
8407
SPARK-IGNITION RECIPROCATING OR ROTARY INTERNAL COMBUSTION PISTON ENGINES
33
8408
COMPRESSION-IGNITION INTERNAL COMBUSTION PISTON ENGINES (DIESEL OR    SEMI-DIESEL ENGINES)
34
8413
PUMPS FOR LIQUIDS, WHETHER OR NOT FITTED WITH A
35
8414
AIR / VACUUM PUMPS, AIR / OTHR GAS COMPRSRS & FANS; VNTLTNG / RCYCLNG    HOODS INCRPRTNG A FAN, W / N FITTED WITH FILTERS
36
8426
DERRICKS; CRNS,INCL CABLE CRNS; MOBL LFTNG FRMS, STRDL CRRS & WRKS    TRCKS FTD WTH A CRN
37
8477
MCHNR FR WRKNG RUBBR / PLSTCS / FR THE MNFCTR OF PRDCTS FROM THESE MTRLS,    N.E.S.
38
8479
MCHNS & MCHNCL APPLNCS HVNG INDVDL FUNCTNS, N.E.S.
39
8481
TAPS, COCKS, VALVES AND SIMILAR APPLIANCES FOR PIPES, BOILER SHELLS,    TANKS, VATS OR THE LIKE, INCLUDING PRESSURE-REDUCING VALV
40
8482
BALL OR ROLLER BEARINGS
41
8483
TRNSMSN SHFTS & CRNKS; GEARS;BALL SCREWS; BEARING HOUSING & OTHR    PLAIN SHFT BEARINGS SPD CHNGRS INCL TORQUE CNVRTRSFFLYWHEELS;
42
8484
GASKETS & SMLR JOINTS OF MTL SHTNG CMBND WTH OTHR MTRL; SETS /    ASSRTMNTS OF GSKTS & SMLR JOINTS, PUT UP IN POUCHES, ENVLPS ETC
43
8486
MACHINES AND APPARATUS OF A KIND USED SOLELY FOR THE MANUFACTURE OF    SEMICONDUCTOR BOULES OR WAFERS, DEVICES, E
44
8501
ELCTRC MOTRS & GENRTRS (EXCL GENRTNG SETS)
45
8502
ELECTRIC GENERATING SETS AND ROTARY CONVERTERS
46
8506
PRIMARY CELLS AND PRIMARY BATTERIES
47
8511
ELCTRCL IGNTN / STRTNG EQPMNT FR SPRK-IGNTN ETC GNRTRS ETC & CUT OUTS    OF A KIND USED IN CONJUNCTION WTH SUCH ENGINES
48
8512
ELECRCL LIGTNG / SIGNALLING EQPMNT (EXCL ARTCLS OF HD NO.8539)WIND SCRN    ETC USED FOR CYCLES / MOTOR VEHICLES
49
8513
PORTBL ELCTRC LAMPS DESIGNED TO FUNCTION BY THEIR OWN SOURCE OF ENERGY    OTHR THN LIGHTING EQPMNTS OF HDG NO.8512
50
8544
INSULATED (INCLUDING ENAMELLED OR ANODISED) WIRE, CABLE (INCLUDING    CO-AXIAL CABLE) AND OTHER INSULATED ELECTRIC CONDUC
51
8545
CRBN ELCTRDS, CRBN BRSHS, LAMP CRBNS ETC. OTHR ARTCLS OF GRAPHITE / OTHR    CRBN, WTH / WTHOUT MTL OF A KND USED FOR ELCTRCL PURPS
52
8546
ELECTRICAL INSULATORS OF ANY MATERIAL
53
8547
INSLTNG FTTNGS FR ELCTRCL MCHNS ETC. ELECTRCL CONDUIT TUBING & JOINTS    THEROF OFBSE MTL LINED WTH INSLTNG MATRL
54
8548
WAST & SCRAP OF PRIMARY CELLS, BATRS & ELECTRC ACUMULTRS; SPENT    PRMRY CELS, BATRSELCTRC ACUMULTRS, ELCTRCL PRTS OF MACH
55
8601
RAIL LOCOMOTIVES POWERED FROM AN EXTERNAL SOURCE OF ELECTRICITY OR BY    ELECTRIC ACCUMULATORS
56
8603
SELF-PROPELLED RAILWAY OR TRAMWAY COACHES, VANS AND TRUCKS, OTHER THAN    THOSE OF HEADING 8604
57
8604
RLWAY / TRMWAY MAINTNANC / SRVC VHCLS, W / N SLF PRPLD (E.G.WRKSHOPS,    CRNS, BALAST TMPRS, TRCKLNRS, TSTNG COCHS & TRCK INSPCTN VHCLS)
58
8606
RALWY / TRMWY GOODS VAN & WAGN,NT SELF-PRPLD
59
8607
PRTS OF RLWAY / TRMWAY LCMTVS / ROLLNG-STOCK
60
8608
RLWAY / TRMWAY TRCK FXTRS & FTNGS; MCHNCL & ELCTRO-MCHNCL SGNLNG,    TRFC CNTRL EQPMNT FR ROADS, INLND WTRWAYS ETC, PRTS OF THE ABOVE
61
8609
CONTAINERS (INCLUDING CONTAINERS FOR THE TRANSPORT OF FLUIDS) SPECIALLY    DESIGNED AND EQUIPPED FOR CARRIAGE BY ONE OR MORE M
62
8712
BICYCLES AND OTHER CYCLES (INCLUDING DELIVERY TRICYCLES), NOT MOTORISED
63
8713
INVALID CARRIAGES, W / N MOTIRISED / OTHERWISE MECHANICALLY PROPELLED
64
8802
OTHER AIRCRAFT (FOR EXAMPLE, HELICOPTERS, AEROPLANES); SPACECRAFT    (INCLUDING SATELLITES) AND SUBORBITAL AND SPACECRAFT
65
8804
PARACHUTES (INCLUDING DIRIGIBLE PARACHUTES AND PARAGLIDERS) AND    ROTOCHUTES; PARTS THEREOF AND ACCESSORIES THERETO
66
8805
AIRCRAFT LAUNCHING GEAR; DECK-ARRESTOR OR SIMILAR GEAR; GROUND FLYING    TRAINERS; PARTS OF THE FOREGOING ARTICLES
67
8901
CRUISE SHIPS, EXCURSION BOATS , FERRY- BOATS, CARGO SHIPS, BARGES AND    SIMILAR VESSELS FOR THE TRANSPORT OF PERSONS OR GO
68
9005
BINOCULAR & OTHR OPTCL TLSCOPS & MOUNTINGSTHRFR; OTHR ASTRNMCL    INSTRUMNT & MOUNTNGS THRFR EXCPT THE INSTRMNT FOR RAD
69
9006
PHTOGRPHC (EXCL CINEMATOGRAPHIC) CAMERAS PHOTOGRAPHIC FLSHLGHT APPARATUS    & FLSHBLBSEXCPT DSCHRG LMPS OF HDG NO.8539
70
9007
CINEMATOGRAPHIC CAMERAS AND PROJECTORS, WHETHER OR NOT INCORPORATING    SOUND RECORDING OR REPRODUCING APPARATUS
71
9010
APARATS & EQPMNT FR PHOTOGRPHC (INCLD CINEMATOGRAPHC) LABORATORIS    N.E.S.IN THIS CHAPTER; NEGATOSCOPES PROJECTION SCREENS
72
9011
CMPND OPTCL MICROSCOPES, INCL THOSE FR MCROPHOTOGRPHY, MCROCENMTGRPHY /    MICROPRJCTN
73
9013
LIQD CRYSTL DVCS NT CNSTITUNG ARTCLS PRVDDFR MORE SPCFCLY IN OTHR HDNGS;    LSRS, NT LSR DIODS; OTHR OPTCL APLNCS & INSTRMNTS N
74
9015
SURVEYING, HYDROGRAPHIC, OCEANOGRAPHIC, HYDROLOGICAL, METEOROLOGICAL /    GEOPHYSICAL INSTRMNTS & APPLNCS, EXCL COMPSS; RNGEFNDRS
75
9016
BLNCS OF A SNSTIVTY OF 5 CG / BTR, W / N WTH WT
76
9017
DRWNG, MRKNG-OUT / MTHMTCL CLCLTNG INSTRMNTS; INSTRMNTS FOR MSRNG LNTH,    FR USE IN THE HND (E.G.MICROMTRS, CALLIPRS) N.E.S.IN THIS C
77
9018
INSTRMNTS & APPLNCS USED IN MDCL, SURGCL, DNTL / VTRNRY SCNCS, INCL    SCNTGRPHC APPRTS ELCTRO-MDCL APPRTS & SIGHT-TSTNG INSTRMNT
78
9019
MCHNO-THRPY APLNCS; MSGE APRTS; PSYCHOLGCL APTTUD-TSTNG APRTS; OZON    THRPY, OXYGN THRPY, AERSL THRPY, ARTFCL RSPRTN APPRTS ETC
79
9021
ORTHPDC APLNCS, ARTFCL PRTS OF TH BODY; HRNGAIDS & OTHR APLNCS WHCH    ARE WRN / CRRD / IMPLNTD IN THE BODY TO CMPNST DFCT / DSABLTY
80
9023
INSTRMNTS, APRTS P MODLS DSIGND FOR DEMONSTRATIONAL PRPS, UNSUTBL FR OTHR    USES
81
9024
MCHNES & APLNCS FR TSTNG THE HRDNSS, STRNGTH, ELSTCTY, COMPRSSBLTY    ETC OF MATRLS
82
9025
HYDROMETERS & SMLR FLOATING INSTRUMENTS, THERMOMETERS, PYROMETERS    ETC, RCORDNG / NT & ANY CMBNTN OF THESE INSTRMNTS
83
9026
INSTRMNTS & APRTS FR MSRNG / CHKNG THE FLOW, LEVL,PRSR / OTHR    VARIABLES OF LIQUID / GASES EXCL APPRTS OF HDG 9014, 9015, 9028 / 9032
84
9027
INSTRUMENTS AND APPARATUS FOR PHYSICAL OR CHEMICAL ANALYSIS (FOR EXAMPLE,    POLARIMETERS, REFRACTOMETERS, SPECTROMETER
85
9028
GAS, LQD / ELECTRICITY SUPPLY / PRODUCTION METERS, INCL CALIBRATING    METERS THEREFOR
86
9029
REVOLUTION COUNTERS, PRODUCTION COUNTERS, TAXIMETERS, MILEOMETERS,    PEDOMETERS AND THE LIKE; SPEED INDICATORS AND TACHOMETERS
87
9031
MEASURING OR CHECKING INSTRUMENTS, APPLIANCES AND MACHINES, NOT SPECIFIED    OR INCLUDED ELSEWHERE IN THIS
88
9033
PRTS & ACCESSORIES FR MACHINES, APPLIANCES, INSTRUMENTS / APPARATUS    OF CHAPTER 90, NES
89
9101
WRIST-WATCHES, POCKET-WATCHES AND OTHER WATCHES, INCLUDING STOP-WATCHES,    WITH CASE OF PRECIOUS METAL OR OF METAL CLAD
90
9102
WRIST-WATCHES, POCKET-WATCHES AND OTHER WATCHES, INCLUDING STOP WATCHES,    OTHER THAN THOSE OF HEADING 9101 WRIST-WATCHES,
91
9103
CLOCKS WITH WATCH MOVEMENTS, EXCLUDING CLOCKS OF HEADING 9104
92
9104
INSTRUMENT PANEL CLOCKS AND CLOCKS OF A SIMILAR TYPE FOR VEHICLES,    AIRCRAFT, SPACECRAFT OR VESSELS
93
9107
TIME SWITCHES WITH CLOCK OR WATCH MOVEMENT OR WITH SYNCHRONOUS MOTOR
94
9108
WATCH MOVEMENTS, COMPLETE AND ASSEMBLED
95
9109
CLOCK MOVEMENTS, COMPLETE AND ASSEMBLED
96
9110
CMPLT WTCH / CLOCK MVMNTS, UNASSMBLD / PRTLY ASSMBLD (MVMNT SETS);    INCMPLT WTCH / CLOCK MVMNTS, ASSMBLD; ROUGH WTCH / CLOCK MVMNTS
97
9111
WATCH CASES AND PARTS THEREOF
98
9112
CLOCK CASES AND CASES OF A SIMILAR TYPE FOR OTHER GOODS OF THIS CHAPTER,    AND PARTS THEREOF
99
9113
WATCH STRAPS, WATCH BANDS AND WATCH BRACELETS, AND PARTS THEREOF
100
9402
MEDCL, SURGCL, DENTAL / VETRNRY FURNITR ETC BARBERS' CHAIRS & SMLR    CHAIRS; PRTS OF THE FOREGOING ARTICLES
101
9405
LMPS & LIGHTING FTTNGS INCL SEARCH LIGHTS AND SPOTLIGHTS ETC    N.E.S.ILLUMINATD SIGNS & THE LIKE WTH PRMNANT LGHT SORCE & PRTSNES
Annex 6
(vide paragraph 4.3)
Annex to
circular DBOD.DIR.BC.No.93/ 04.02.001 /2012-13 dated May 24,  2013
ITC(HS)
ITC(HS)    Description
1
6301
Blankets and Travelling Rugs
2
6302
Bed Linen, Table Linen, Toilet Linen and Kitchen Linen
3
6303
Curtains (Including Drapes) and Interior Blinds; Curtain or Bed Valances
4
6305
Sacks and Bags, of a Kind used for the Packing of Goods
5
6306
Tarpaulins, Awnings and Sunblinds; Tents; Sails for Boats, Sailboards or    Landcraft; Camping Goods
6
6307
Other Made up Articles, Including Dress Patterns
Appendix  I
List  of Circulars consolidated by the Master Circular on  Rupee Export Credit
Sr.
No.
Circular     No.
Date
Subject
1
DBOD.Dir.BC.No.57/04.02.001/2013-14
25.09.2013
Export    Credit in Foreign Currency
2
DBOD.Dir.BC.No.43/04.02.001/2013-14
26.08.2013
Rupee    Export Credit-Interest Subvention
3
DBOD.DIR.BC.No.93/04.02.001/2012-13
24.05.2013
Rupee    Export Credit-Interest Subvention
4
DBOD.Dir.(Exp).BC.No.70/04.02.001/2012-13
14.01.2013
Rupee    Export Credit- Interest Subvention
5
DBOD.Dir.(Exp) BC.No.112/04.02.001/2011-12
19.06.2012
Rupee    Export Credit Interest Rates
6
DBOD.Dir.BC.No.100/04.02.001/2011-12
04.05.2012
Deregulation of Interest Rates on Export Credit in    Foreign Currency
7
A.P.(Dir Series) Circular no.40
01.11.2011
Export of Goods and Software- Realisation and Repatriation    of Export Proceeds-Liberalisation
8
DBOD.Dir(Exp)BC.No.38/04.02.001/2011-12
11.10.2011
Rupee    Export Credit Interest rates
9
DBOD.Dir.(Exp).BC.No. 85 /04.02.001/2010-11
18.04.2011
Liquidation    of Post-Shipment Rupee Export Credit
10
A.P.(DIR Series) Circular No.47
31.03.2011
Export    of Goods and Software- Realisation and Repatriation of export proceeds -    Liberalisation
11
DBOD.Dir.(Exp).BC.No. 36 /04.02.001/2010-11
09.08.2010
Rupee    Export Credit Interest Rates
12
DBOD.Dir.(Exp).BC.No. 115/04.02.001/2009-10
29.06.2010
Rupee    Export Credit Interest Rates
13
DBOD.Dir.(Exp).BC.No. 102/04.02.001/2009-10
06.05.2010
Rupee    Export Credit Interest Rates
14
DBOD.Dir.(Exp).BC.No. 94/04.02.001/2009-10
23.04.2010
Rupee Export Credit Interest Rates
Subvention
15
DBOD.Dir.(Exp).BC.No. 54/04.02.01/2009-10
29.10.2009
Rupee    Export Credit Interest Rates
Extension    of period
16
DBOD.DIR.(Exp).BC.No.
07/04.02.02/2009-10
01.07.2009
Master    Circular on Rupee /Foreign Currency Export Credit & Customer Service to    Exporters
17
DBOD.Dir.(Exp) No.131/04.02.01/2008-09
28.04.2009
Rupee    Export Credit Interest Rates
Extension    of period
18
DBOD.Dir.(Exp) No.10/04.02.01/2008-09
16.12.2008
Rupee    Export Credit Interest Rates
Subvention
19
DBOD.Dir.(Exp) No.95/04.02.01/2008-09
08.12.2008
Rupee    Export Credit Interest Rates Interest on overdue Export bills
20
DBOD.Dir.(Exp) No.88/04.02.01/2008-09
28.11.2008
Rupee    Export Credit Interest Rates
Extension    of post-shipment period of credit
21
DBOD.Dir.(Exp) No.80/04.02.01/2008-09
15.11.2008
Rupee    Export Credit Interest Rates
Extension    of pre-shipment period of credit
22
DBOD.Dir.(Exp) No.77/04.02.01/2008-09
07.11.2008
Rupee    Export Credit Interest Rates
Subvention    - clarification
23
DBOD.Dir.(Exp) No.68/04.02.01/2008-09
24.10.2008
Rupee    Export Credit Interest Rates
Extension    of period
24
DBOD.Dir.(Exp)BC No.77/04.02.01/2007-08
28.04.2008
Rupee Export Credit Interest Rates
Extension of subvention period
25
DBOD.Dir.(Exp)BC No.73/04.02.01/2007-08
25.04.2008
Rupee Export Credit Interest Rates
extension of period
26
DBOD.Dir.(Exp)BC No.54/04.02.01/2007-08
30.11.2007
Rupee Export Credit Interest Rates Subvention
27
DBOD.Dir.(Exp)BC No.41/04.02.01/2007-08
29.10.2007
Rupee Export Credit Interest Rates
extension of period
28
DBOD.Dir.(Exp)BC No.34B/04.02.01/2007-08
06.10.2007
Rupee Export Credit Interest Rates
Subvention
29
DBOD.Dir.(Exp)BC No.22/04.02.01/2007-08
13.07.2007
Rupee Export Credit Interest Rates
Subvention
30
DBOD.Dir.(Exp)BC No.80/04.02.01/2006-07
17.04.2007
Rupee Export Credit Interest Rates
31
DBOD.Dir.(Exp)BC No.37/04.02.01/2006-07
20.10.2006
Rupee Export Credit Interest Rates
32
DBOD.Dir.(Exp) BC No.83/04.02.01/2005-06
28.04.2006
Rupee Export Credit Interest Rates
33
DBOD.Dir.(Exp) BC No.41/04.02.01/2005-06
02.11.2005
Rupee Export Credit Interest Rates
34
DBOD. Dir (Exp). No. 83/04.02.01/2004-05
29.04.2005
Rupee Export    Credit Interest Rates
35
IECD.No.14/01.01.43/2003-04
30.06.2004
Merger of functions of Industrial & Export Credit department of Reserve    Bank of India with its    other Departments
36
IECD No.12/ 04.02.02/ 2003-04
18.05.2004
Gold Card scheme for Exporters
37
IECD No.13/04.02.01/ 2003-04
18.05.2004
Rupee Export credit Interest Rates for gold card holder Exporters
38
IECD No. 10/ 04.02.01/ 2003-04
24.04.2004
Rupee Export Credit Interest Rates
39
IECD No. 5/04.02.01/ 2003-04
31.10.2003
Rupee Export Credit Interest Rates
40
IECD No. 18/04.02.01/ 2002-03
30.04.2003
Rupee Export Credit Interest rates
41
IECD No.16/04.02.02/ 2002-03
01.04.2003
Export Credit - SEZ Units
42
IECD No.8/04.02.01/2002-03
28.09.2002
Special    Financial Package for Large value Exports
43
IECD No.7/04.02.01/2002-03
23.09.2002
Rupee Export Credit Interest rates
44
IECD.No.17/04.02.01/2001-02
15.03.2002
Rupee Export Credit Interest Rates
45
IECD.No.15/04.02.02/2001-02
03.01.2002
Export Credit to Processors/ Exporters-Agri-Export Zones
46
IECD.No.4/04.02.01/2001-02
24.09.2001
Rupee Export Credit Interest Rates
47
IECD.No.13/04.02.01/2000-01
19.04.2001
Rupee Export Credit Interest Rates
48
IECD.No.9/04.02.01/2000-2001
05.01.2001
Interest Rate on Export Credit
49
IECD.No.15/04.02.01/99-2000
25.05.2000
Export Credit - Interest Rates
50
IECD.No.14/04.02.02/1999-2000
17.05.2000
Consignment Exports to Russian Federation against    Repayment of State Credits - Interest Rates on Post-shipment Credit in Rupees
51
IECD.No.12/04.02.01/1999-2000
15.03.2000
Export Credit Interest Rate – Clarifications
52
IECD.No.6/04.02.01/99-2000
29.10.1999
Export Credit - Interest Rates
53
IECD.No.23/04.02.01/
98-99
12.04.1999
Change    of Tenor of Bill - Applicability of Concessional Rate of Interest
54
IECD.No.19/04.02.01/98-99
03.03.1999
Export Credit - Interest Rates
55
IECD.No.16/04.02.01/
98-99
25.02.1999
Advance against Duty Drawback Claims
56
IECD.No.11/04.02.01/
98-99
13.01.1999
Export    Credit - Floriculture, Grapes and Other Agro Products
57
IECD.No.6/08.12.01/
98-99
08.08.1998
Guidelines    for Sanction of Working Capital Finance to Information Technology (IT) and    Software Industry
58
IECD.No.5/04.02.01/
98-99
06.08.1998
Export Credit - Interest Rates
59
IECD.No.41/04.02.01/
97-98
29.04.1998
Export Credit - Interest Rates
60
IECD.No.38/04.02.02/
97-98
02.03.1998
Post-shipment    Finance in respect of Exports through the Warehouse-cum-Display Centre at    Dubai
61
IECD.No.32/04.02.01/
97-98
31.12.1997
Export Credit - Rate of Interest on Overdue Export Bills
62
IECD.No.31/04.02.01/
97-98
31.12.1997
Export Credit - Rate of Interest on Post-shipment Rupee Credit
63
IECD.No.29/04.02.01/
97-98
29.12.1997
Export Credit - Interest Rates on    Post-shipment Rupee Credit – Clarifications
64
IECD.No.26/04.02.01/
97-98
17.12.1997
Export Credit - Interest Rates on    Post-shipment Rupee Credit
65
IECD.No.19/04.02.01/
97-98
29.11.1997
Export Credit - Interest Rates on    Post-shipment Rupee Credit
66
IECD.No.18/04.02.01/
97-98
26.11.1997
Export Credit - Interest Rates on    Post-shipment Rupee Credit
67
IECD.No.11/04.02.01/
97-98
21.10.1997
Export Credit - Interest Rates
68
IECD.No.9/04.02.01/
97-98
12.09.1997
Export Credit - Interest Rates on Post-shipment    Rupee Credit
69
IECD.No.1/04.02.01/
97-98
05.07.1997
Extension of Concessive Credit for Deemed    Exports
70
IECD.No.32/04.02.01/
96-97
25.06.1997
Export Credit - Interest Rates
71
IECD.No.29/04.02.01/
96-97
17.04.1997
Post-shipment Finance in respect of    Exports through the Warehouse-cum-Display Centre at Dubai
72
IECD.No.27/04.02.01/
96-97
15.04.1997
Export Credit - Interest Rates
73
IECD.No.16/04.02.01/
96-97
22.11.1996
Extension of Concessive Credit for Deemed    Exports -List of Multilateral/Bilateral agencies/funds
74
IECD.No.15/04.02.01/
96-97
19.11.1996
Export Credit - Export Credit and    Guarantee Corporation - Whole Turnover Post-shipment Guarantee Scheme
75
IECD.No.10/04.02.01/
96-97
19.10.1996
Interest Rates on Advances - Post-shipment    Rupee Credit
76
IECD.No.2/04.02.01/
96-97
03.07.1996
Interest Rates for Post-shipment Export    Credit on Medium and Long Term Basis (Deferred Credit for the Period beyond    180 days)
77
IECD.No.20/04.02.01/
95-96
07.02.1996
Interest Rates on Advances - Post-shipment
Export Rupee Credit
78
IECD.No.30/04.02.02/
94-95
14.12.1994
Relaxations in the Area of Export Packing    Credit
79
IECD.No.25/04.02.02/
94-95
10.11.1994
Inland Export LC System Covering the    Sub-suppliers to an Export Order
80
IECD.No.17/04.02.02/
94-95
11.10.1994
Export Packing Credit - Relaxations in    Interest Rates
81
IECD.No.11/04.02.02/
94-95
05.09.1994
Liquidation of Export Packing Credit
82
IECD.No.5/04.02.02/
94-95
04.08.1994
Extension of Concessive Credit for Deemed    Exports-List of Multilateral/ Bilateral Agencies/Funds
83
IECD.No.EFD.42/04.02.02/93-94
07.05.1994
Consignment Exports to CIS and East    European Countries - Interest Rates on Post-shipment Credit
84
IECD.No.EFD.23/04.02.02/93-94
10.12.1993
Extension of Concessive Export Credit for    Deemed Exports - List of Multilateral or Bilateral Agencies/ Funds
85
IECD.No.EFD.2/04.02.
02/93-94
02.08.1993
Extension of Concessive Export Credit for    Deemed Exports
86
IECD.No.16/EFD/BC/819/POL- ECR/91-92
15.12.1992
Export Finance for Storing and Sale    through Warehouses Abroad.
87
IECD.No.56/EFD/BC/819/POL- ECR/91-92
14.03.1992
Extension of Pre-shipment Credit - Running    Account ECR/91-92 Facility
88
IECD.No.55/EFD/BC/819/POL- ECR/91-92
12.03.1992
Pre-shipment Credit for Periods Beyond 180    Days
89
IECD.No.53/EFD/BC/819/POL- ECR/91-92
29.02.1992
Interest Rates on Export Credit
90
IECD.No.47/EFD/BC/819/POL- ECR/91-92
25.01.1992
Packing Credit - Running Account Facility
91
IECD.No.31/EFD/BC/819/POL- ECR/91-92
20.11.1991
Extension of Packing Credit - Running    Account Facility
92
IECD.No.25/EFD/BC/819/POL- ECR/91-92
09.10.1991
Interest Rates on Export Credit
93
IECD.No.22/EFD/BC/819/POL- ECR/91-92
27.09.1991
Interest Rates on Post-shipment Export Credit
94
IECD.No.11/EFD/BC/819/POL- ECR/91-92
05.08.1991
Interest Rates on Advances – Export Credit
95
IECD.No.2/EFD/BC/819-POL- ECR/91-92
09.07.1991
Export Credit (Interest Subsidy) Scheme,    1968 - Interest on Post-shipment Credit Adjusted from Rupee Resources
96
IECD.No.EFD.BC.49/819-POL- ECR/90-91
22.04.1991
Interest Rates on Advances – Export
credit
97
IECD.No.EFD/BC/48/819/POL- ECR/90-91
02.04.1991
Interest Rates on Advances - Export
Credit
98
IECD.No.EFD/BC/47/819/POL- ECR/90-91
01.04.1991
Interest Rates on Advances - Export
Credit
99
IECD.No.EFD.BC.44/DDB(P)-91
26.03.1991
Duty    Drawback Credit Scheme, 1976 –
Grant of Interest- free Advances against –    Duty Drawback Entitlements under Brand Rate
100
IECD.No.EFD.BC.8/819-POL- ECR/89-90
28.09.1989
Export Credit (Interest Subsidy)
Scheme, 1968 - Normal Transit Period-
Demands Bill bills
101
IECD.No.EFD.BC.253/819-POL- ECR/89
27.05.1989
Export Credit (Interest Subsidy)
Scheme, 1968 - Interest on Post-
shipment Credit Adjusted from Rupee
Resources
102
IECD.No.EFD.BC.250/380- DDB(P)-89
29.04.1989
Duty Drawback Credit Scheme, 1976
103
IECD.No.EFD.BC.248/819-POL- ECR-89
13.03.1989
Packing Credit for Imports against
Entitlements under Advance Licence/
Import-Export Pass Book Scheme
104
IECD.No.EFD.BC.240/819-POL- ECR-89
03.03.1989
Export Credit (Interest Subsidy)
Scheme, 1968 – Provision of
Concessive Credit against Proceeds of
Cheques, Drafts etc. Received Directly
towards Advance Payment of Exports
105
IECD.No.EFD.215/822-WGM—NOD-88
12.08.1988
Overseas Civil Engineering Construction    Contracts- Consultancy Services
106
IECD.No.EFD.197/822-WGM- NOD-88
30.01.1988
Project Exports - Grant of Credit
Facilities to IndianContractors
107
IECD.No.EFD.BC.188/819-POL- ECR-87
06.11.1987
Export Credit (Interest Subsidy)
Scheme, 1968 –Packing Credit relating
to the Export of Cashew nuts and Other
Agro- based Products
108
IECD.No.EFD.BC.181/819-POL- ECR-87
10.08.1987
Export Credit Guarantee Corporation
of    India Ltd. (ECGC) - Realisation of
Long Outstanding Export Bills –
Recovery Efforts by Banks
109
IECD.No.EFD.BC.163/819-POL—ECR-87
04.03.1987
Export Credit (Interest Subsidy)
Scheme, 1968 - Clarification regarding
'Normal Transit Period’
110
IECD.No.EFD.BC.153/819-POL- Pre-ECR-87
03.01.1987
Export Credit (Interest Subsidy)
Scheme, 1968 – Pre-shipment Advance
- Concessive Rate of Interest
111
IECD.No.EFD.BC.148/819-POL- ECR-86
24.11.1986
Export Credit (Interest Subsidy)
Scheme, 1968 –Interest on Advances
against Demand Bills
112
DBOD.No.Dir.BC.23/C.96-86
28.02.1986
Pre-shipment Finance for Exports
113
IECD.No.EFD.BC.133/015-EOU-85
21.11.1985
Export Credit to 100 percent Export
Oriented Units (EOUs)
114
IECD.No.EFD.BC.127/819-POL- ECR-85
08.10.1985
Export Credit (Interest Subsidy)
Scheme, 1968 – Post Supply Facilities
against Supplies to IBRD/IDA/UNICEF
aided Projects/Programmes in India
115
IECD.No.EFD.BC.109/819-POL- ECR-85
27.03.1985
Pre-shipment Credit to Exporters of Iron
Ore
116
IECD.No.EFD.BC.103/819-POL- ECR-85
04.02.1985
Export Credit (Interest Subsidy)
Scheme, 1968 –Grant of Pre-shipment
Credit - Substitution of Contract, etc.
117
IECD.No.EFD.BC.102/819-POL- ECR-85
28.01.1985
Export Credit - Export of Commodities
on Consignment Basis
118
IECD.No.EFD.BC.86/C.819-POL- ECR-84
15.03.1984
Export Credit (Interest Subsidy)
Scheme, 1968 – Repatriation of
Proceeds of Export Bills – Clarification
119
IECD.No.EFD.BC.80/015.EOU.84
19.01.1984
Export Credit to 100 percent Export
Oriented Units (EOUs)
120
IECD.No.EFD.BC.75/C.297(P)--83
06.12.1983
Strategy for Exports to Africa - Extract
from Report of Gen(Africa)Sub-Group of Standing Committee    on Export Finance
121
IECD.No.EFD.BC.59 & 60/C.297 P-83
20.06.1983
Packing Credit Advances to Exporters of    Deoiled and Defatted Cakes – Revised Directive
122
DBOD.No.ECC.BC.143,144/C.297 P-80
09.12.1980
Pre-shipment Credit – Ceiling Rate of
Interest – Directive
123
DBOD.No.ECC.BC.172/C.297P-79
04.12.1979
Export Credit - Export Credit and
Guarantee Corporation Whole Turnover
Post-shipment Export Credit Guarantee
Scheme
124
DBOD.No.ACC.BC.107/C.297P(C)-79
23.07.1979
Duty Drawback Credit Scheme, 1976 –    Adjustments in the Loan Accounts in the Prescribed Time
125
DBOD.No.ECC.BC.104/C.297P-
14.07.1979
Export Credit - Export Credit and    Guarantee Corporation- Whole Turnover Post-shipment Guarantee Scheme
126
DBOD.No.ECC.BC.81/C.297P-79
05.06.1979
Export Credit (Interest Subsidy) Scheme,    1968 – Repatriation of Proceeds to Cover Export Bills
127
DBOD.No.ECC.BC.73/C.297(O) (12)-79
02.06.1979
Export Credit - Export of Diamonds
128
DBOD.No.ACC.BC.118/C.
297P(C)-79
07.04.1979
Duty Drawback Credit Scheme, 1976 –    Revised Accounting Procedure
129
DBOD.No.ACC.BC.55/C.297P(C)- 79
07.04.1979
Duty Drawback Credit Scheme, 1976 –    Amendments
130
DBOD.No.ACC.BC.38/C.297P(C)- 79
06.03.1979
Duty Drawback Credit Scheme, 1976 –    Relaxation
131
DBOD.No.ECC.BC.14,15/C.297P-79
22.01.1979
Export Credit - Post-shipment Credit –    Ceiling Rate of Interest – Directive
132
DBOD.No.ECC.BC.9/C.297P-79
15.01.1979
Advances to Units in Free Trade/Export    Promotion Zones
133
DBOD.ACC.BC.70/ C.297P( C)-78
18.05.1978
Duty Drawback Credit Scheme, 1976- Credit    to Loan Account of Borrowing Bank by way of Adjustment towards Repayment of    Advances made by RBI
134
DBOD.ECC.BC.57/ C.297L (I.D) Gen-78
04.05.1978
Export Credit- Banks Advised to Obtain    Clearance for Issuing Bid Bonds / Guarantees from Working Group- Overseas    Construction Contracts
135
DBOD.ECC.BC.45/ C.297 (O) (12)-78
29.03.1978
Export Credit- Regarding Bank Finance for    Export Of Diamonds
136
DBOD.ECC.BC.39 & 40/ C.297 P-78
08.03.1978
Export Credit-Ceiling Rate on Interest-    Directives
137
DBOD.ECC.BC. 82/C.297L(4.1)-77
04.07.1977
Export Credit- Guidelines for Financing    Overseas Construction Contracts
138
DBOD.ECC.BC.55/ C.297P-77
28.05.1977
Post-shipment Credit Given on Deferred    Payment Terms- Export Of Capital and Producer Goods-High Value Engineering    and Equipment Goods
139
DBOD.ACC.BC.52/C.297P( C)-77
25.05.1977
Duty Drawbacks Credit Scheme, 1976- Advice    to Banks to Fix Limits in a Realistic Manner
140
DBOD.ECC.BC.31/C297M-77.
29.03.1977
Export Credit (Interest Subsidy) Scheme,    1968-Packing Credit Advances to Exporters of HPS Groundnut and of Deoiled and    Defatted Cakes- Clarification regarding interest subsidy Claims and    Concessional Rate of Interest
141
DBOD.ECC.BC.8/ C.297M-77
13.01.1977
Export Credit (Interest Subsidy) Scheme,    1968-Advances Against Undrawn Balances and Retention Money
142
DBOD.ECC.BC.154/C.297P-76
27.12.1976
Export Credit- Clarification Regarding    Interest @ 8 percent p.a. on Post shipment Credit only on Credit Extended for    the Periods Exceeding One Year
143
DBOD.ACC.BC.66/ C.297P ( C)-76
23.06.1976
Duty Drawbacks Credit Scheme, 1976-Minimum    Amount to be Borrowed by Banks from RBI at One Time Being Reduced to Rs. 20,    000/- from Rs.1 lakh.
144
DBOD.ECC.BC.38/C.297P-76
22.03.1976
Export Credit (Interest Subsidy) Scheme,    1968-Packing Credit Advances
145
DBOD.ACC.BC.25/C.297P ( C)-76
21.02.1976
Duty Drawbacks Credit Scheme, 1976-Advice    to Banks to Verify the Bill of Lading, etc. at the time of Sanctioning    Advances Under the Scheme
146
DBOD.ECC.BC.20/ C.297P-76
09.02.1976
Pre- Shipment Credit –Advice to Banks to    Grant Packing Credit Facilities to Jute Mills on the Basis of Cable Advices    from Foreign Buyers
147
DBOD.ECC.BC.19/ C.297P-76
09.02.1976
Pre-Shipment Credit Operational    Flexibility Relaxation in regard to the Substitution of Contracts and    Financing of Export through Export Houses /Agencies
148
DBOD.ECC.BC.16/ C.297L(LF)-76
06.02.1976
Export Credit-Financing of Carpet    Exporters – Advice to Banks to give Adequate Powers to Branch    Managers/Regional Managers to Dispose of the Export Credit Proposals Promptly
149
DBOD.ECC.BC.12/ C.297(L-11)-76
27.01.1976
Export Credit - Export of Consultancy    Services –Advice to Banks to Extend Necessary Support
150
DBOD.ECC.BC.2/C.297L(16)-76
07.01.1976
Duty Drawback Credit Scheme, 1976
151
DBOD.ECC.BC.91/C.297P-75
23.10.1975
Export Credit - Export of Goods for    Exhibition-cum-Sale - Concessional Rate of Interest to be Charged by Banks    for Manufacture of Products for Sale and Exhibition Abroad
152
DBOD.ECC.BC.57/C.297P-75
14.08.1975
Export Credit - Export of Consultancy    Services -Sanction of Credit Limits by Banks against Consultancy Agreements    for Meeting Expenses of the Technical and Other Staff
153
DBOD.ECC.BC.33/C.297P-75
19.04.1975
Post-shipment Credit on Deferred Payment    Terms -Advice to Banks to Charge the Interest at a Concessional Ceiling Rate    of 8 percent p.a. for a Period Exceeding One Year
154
DBOD.BM.BC.7/C.297P-74
12.01.1974
Export Credit - Advice to Banks to Keep a    Close Watch On the Utilisation of    Export Credit with Reference to both the Quantum and the Period
155
DBOD.BM.BC.81/C.297M-73
18.07.1973
Pre-shipment Credit Scheme and Export    Credit (Interest Subsidy) Scheme, 1968 - Packing Credit Facilities against    Supplies to IBRD/IDA/ UNICEF aided Projects/Programmes in India Eligible for    both for Refinance and Interest Subsidy
156
DBOD.BM.BC.58/C.297P-73
31.05.1973
Pre-shipment Credit Scheme - Export of    Precious and Semi-precious Stones, Pearls and Synthetic Stones –Clarification    that Packing Credit Advances may be Adjusted by Transfer of the Outstanding    Balance to a Special (Post-shipment) Account
157
DBOD.BM.BC.120/C.297P-72
06.12.1972
Packing Credit Advances to Miners of Iron    Ore in Goa who Supply Ore to Exporters for Export
158
DBOD.BM.BC.97/C.297(M)-72
30.10.1972
Pre-shipment Credit Scheme and Export    Credit (Interest Subsidy) Scheme, 1968 - Cash Incentives, Duty Drawbacks,    etc. - Clarification regarding ECGC Scheme
159
DBOD.BM.BC.74/C.297(M)-72
30.08.1972
Pre-shipment Credit Scheme and Export    Credit (Interest Subsidy) Scheme, 1968 - Cash Incentives, Duty Drawbacks, etc
160
DBOD.BM.BC.70/C.297P-72
09.08.1972
Packing Credit Advances relating to Export    of Mineral Ores
161
DBOD.BM.BC.62/C.297(M)-71
21.05.1971
Pre-shipment Credit Scheme and Export    Credit (Interest Subsidy) Scheme, 1968 - Advice to Banks to keep a close    watch not only on the end-use of the finance but also for the timely    fulfilment of Export Orders and to Scrutinise Applications for Extension of    time carefully
162
DBOD.Sch.BC.51/C.96-71
16.04.1971
Packing Credit and Post-shipment Credit –    Interest Rates Structure - Ceiling of 7 percent per annum for Packing Credit    and Post-shipment Credit other than Credits Provided for Exporters on    Deferred Payment Terms
163
DBOD.BM.64/C.297P-70
12.01.1970
Pre-shipment Credit Scheme - Export of    Precious, Semi-precious Stones, Pearls and Synthetic Stones
164
DBOD.BM.1152/C.297(M)-69
11.07.1969
Advances to Scheduled Banks under Section    17(3A) of RBI Act - Advances to Exporters who do not have Letters of Credit    or Export Orders in their Own Name and who Route their Exports through State    Trading Corporation, Minerals and Metals Trading Corporation and other Export    Houses – Clarification
165
DBOD.BM.1064/C.297P-69
01.07.1969
Pre-shipment Credit Scheme in respect of    Export of Diamonds
166
DBOD.BM.1040/C.297P-69
27.06.1969
Pre-shipment Credit Scheme-Advances to    Tanners who Supply Leather Good to State Trading Corporation for Feeding    Leather Articles to be Exported-To be treated as Packing Credit
167
DBOD.BM.984/C.297P-69
19.06.1969
Pre-shipment Credit Scheme-Certain    Advances to Construction Contractors to be treated as Packing Credit
168
DBOD.BM.682/C.297K-69
07.04.1969
Export Credit –Charging of Interest
169
DBOD.BM.588/C.297A-69
26.03.1969
Refinancing of Packing Credit Advances    relating to Export of Ores through Minerals and Metals Trading Corporation
170
DBOD.BM.254/C.297A-69
14.02.1969
Packing Credit Advances-Clarification-Grant    of such Advances should not be Conditional on a Letter of Credit being opened
171
DBOD.BM.1489/C.297A-68
07.11.1968
Packing Credit Advances-Period for which    such advances may be given-Clarification
172
DBOD.BM.1179/C.297A-68
19.08.1968
Refinancing of Packing Credit Advances    relating to Export of Cashew nuts-Stage from which Maximum Rate of Interest    applicable-Further Clarification
173
DBOD.BM.974/C.297A-68
27.06.1968
Packing Credit Facilities relating to    Export of Cashew nuts
174
DBOD.BM.785/ C.297A-68
18.05.1968
Packing Credit Facilities relating to    Export of Cashew nuts
175
DBOD. BM.558/C.297A-68
06.04.1968
Packing Credit Facilities to Exporters
176
DBOD.BM.2732/C.297K-63
13.03.1963
Export Bills Credit Scheme-Salient    Features of the Scheme-Procedure
Appendix II
List of Circulars  consolidated by the Master Circular on
EXPORT CREDIT IN FOREIGN  CURRENCY
No.
Circular No.
Date
Subject
DBOD.Dir.No.100/04.02.001/2011-12
04.05.2012
Deregulation of Interest Rates on    Export Credit in Foreign Currency
DBOD.DIR.No.91/04.02.001/2011-12
30.03.2012
Interest Rates on Export Credit    in Foreign Currency
DBOD.Dir.No.52.04.02.001/2011-12
15.11.2011
Interest Rates on Export Credit    in Foreign Currency
DBOD.DIR.(Exp).No. 76/04.02.001/2009-10
19.02.2010
Interest Rates on Export Credit in Foreign Currency
DBOD.DIR.(Exp).BC.No.
07/04.02.02/2009-10
01.07.2009
Master    Circular on Rupee /Foreign Currency Export Credit & Customer Service to    Exporters
DBOD.Dir (Exp)No107/ 04.02.01/2008-09
05.02.2009
Interest Rates on Export Credit in Foreign Currency
DBOD.Dir (Exp)No78/ 04.02.01/2005-06
18.04.2006
Interest Rates on Export Credit in Foreign Currency
DBOD.IECS.No.66/ 04.02.02/2004-05
31.12.2004
Foreign Currency    loans to Exporters-Periodicity of    charging interest
IECD No.12/04.02.02/ 2003-04
18.05.2004
Gold Card Scheme for Exporters
IECD No.12/04.02.02/ 2002-03
31.01.2003
Export Credit in Foreign Currency-Sources    of funds
IECD No.9/04.02.02/ 2002-03
31.10.2002
Export Credit – Liquidation of Packing    Credit and conversion of drawals under rupee packing credit into PCFC.
IECD.No.21/04.02.01/2001-02
29.04.2002
Interest Rates on Export Credit in Foreign    Currency
IECD.No.14/04.02.01/2000-01
19.04.2001
Interest Rates on Export Credit in Foreign    Currency
IECD.No.13/04.02.02/1999-2000
17.05.2000
Pre-shipment Credit in Foreign Currency    (PCFC) to Exporters Operating under Diamond Dollar Account Scheme
IECD.No.47/3840/04.
02.01/97-98
11.06.1998
Export Credit in Foreign Currency
IECD.No.28/04.02.01/96-97
17.04.1997
Extension of Facility of Pre-shipment    Credit in Foreign Currency (PCFC)
IECD.No.22/04.02.01/95-96
29.02.1996
Export Credit – PCFC
IECD.No.15/04.02.15/95-96
22.12.1995
Exports to Asian Clearing Union Countries -    Granting of Export Credit in Foreign Currency under Pre-shipment Credit in Foreign Currency (PCFC), and    Export Bills Rediscounting Scheme (EBR)
IECD.No.EFD.40/04.
02.15/94-95
18.04.1995
Pre-shipment Credit in Foreign    Currency(PCFC) - Forward Exchange Cover
IECD.No.30/04.02.02/94-95
14.12.1994
Relaxations in the Area of Export Packing    Credit
IECD.No.27/04.02.15/94-95
14.11.1994
Sharing of Packing Credit under PCFC
IECD.No.13/04.02.02/94-95
26.09.1994
Pre-shipment Credit in Foreign    Currency(PCFC) Scheme – Supplies from one EOU/EPZ Unit to another
EOU/EPZ Unit
IECD.No.10/04.02.15/94-95
03.09.1994
Export Financing in Foreign Currencies
IECD.No.EFD.43/04.
02.15/93-94
18.05.1994
Pre-shipment Credit in Foreign    Currency(PCFC) – Extension of 'Running Account' Facility
IECD.No.EFD.37/04.
02.15/93-94
30.03.1994
Pre-shipment Credit in Foreign    Currency(PCFC) - Clarifications/ Relaxations
IECD.No.EFD.32/04.
02.11/93-94
03.03.1994
Rediscount of Export Bills Abroad and    Pre-shipment Credit in Foreign Currency (PCFC) - Withholding Tax
IECD.No.EFD.31/04.
02.15/93-94
03.03.1994
Pre-shipment Credit in Foreign    Currency(PCFC) - Extension of 'Running Account' Facility for Export of    Diamonds
IECD.No.EFD.30/04.
02.15/93-94
28.02.1994
Pre-shipment Credit in Foreign    Currency(PCFC) – Clarifications
IECD.No.EFD.21/04.
02.15/93-94
08.11.1993
Pre-shipment Credit in Foreign Currency (PCFC)
IECD.No.EFD.14/04.
02.11/93-94
06.10.1993
Rediscounting of Export Bills Abroad
Appendix III
List of Circulars consolidated by the  Master Circular on
EXPORT CREDIT - CUSTOMER SERVICE
No.
Circular No.
Date
Subject
1
DBOD.DIR.NO.34/04.02.001/2012-13
01.08.2012
Advances-    Out of pocket expenses
2
DBOD.Dir.(Exp)BC.No.38/04.
02.01/(WG)/2006-07
14.11.2006
Recommendations of the Working Group to    Review Export Credit
3
DBOD.Dir.(Exp)BC.No.61/04.
02.01/(WG)/2005-06
07.02.2006
Recommendations of the Working Group to    Review Export Credit
4
DBOD.IECS.No.43/04.02.10/2004-05
17.09.2004
Winding up of the State Level Export    Promotion Committee (SLEPC) and constitution of a separate Sub-Committee    under State Level Bankers' Committee
5
IECD. No. 14/01.01.43/2003-04
30.06.2004
Merger of functions of Industrial and    Export Credit Department of Reserve Bank of India with its other Departments
6
IECD No. 12/04.02.02/2003-04
18.05.2004
Gold Card Scheme for Exporters
7
IECD No. 13/04.02.01/2003-04
18.05.2004
Rupee Export Credit Interest Rates for Gold Card Holder Exporters
8
IECD.No.23/04.02.02/2001-02
07.05.2002
Concessive Rupee Export Credit for Deemed    Exports
9
IECD No.21/04.02.01/2001-02
29.04.2002
Interest Rates on Export Credit in Foreign    Currency
10
IECD.No.3/04.02.02/2001-02
30.08.2001
Credit Extended to Diamond Exporters-    Embargo on Import of Conflict Diamonds – Liberia
11
IECD.No.7/04.02.02/2000-2001
05.12.2000
Credit Extended to Diamond Exporters-    Embargo on Import of Conflict Diamonds
12
IECD.No.4/04.02.02/2000-2001
10.10.2000
Export Credit - Suggestions from Exporters    for Improvement in Procedures - Action Points
13
IECD.No.1/04.02.02/2000-2001
13.07.2000
Credit Extended to Diamond Exporters-    Embargo on Import of Conflict Diamonds
14
IECD.No.3/04.02.01/99-2000
07.09.1999
Simplification of Procedures for Delivery    of Export Credit
15
IECD.No.17/04.02.01/98-99
28.02.1999
Export Credit in Foreign Currency at    Internationally Competitive Rates - Simplification of Procedures
16
IECD.No.EFD.30/04.02.02/97-98
31.12.1997
Statistics relating to Export Credit
17
IECD.No.EFD.27/04.02.02/95-96
05.06.1996
Statistics relating to Export Credit -    Submission of Returns/Statements by Banks
18
IECD.No.EFD.48/04.02.02/94-95
22.05.1995
Statistics relating to Export Credit
19
IECD.No.9/04.02.02/94-95
29.08.1994
Export Credit - Performance Indicator for    Banks
20
IECD.No.EFD.45/04.02.02/93-94
23.05.1994
Statistics relating to Export Credit
21
IECD.No.EFD.22/04.02.02/93-94
08.12.1993
Report of the Committee on Structure of    Export Credit – Streamlining of    Sanctioning Procedure for Loans and Advances with Particular Reference to    Export Credit
22
IECD.No.EFD.18/04.02.02/93-94
20.10.1993
Payment of Compensation to the Exporters in    respect of Delayed Credit of Export    Bills
23
IECD.No.EFD.18/819-POL/ ECR/92-93
26.12.1992
Export Credit Target
24
IECD.No.8/EFD/819-POL-ECR/92-93
05.11.1992
Delay in Sanction of Loan Limits to    Borrowers with Particular Reference to    Exporters
25
IECD.No.3/EFD/BC/819/POL- ECR/92-93
24.08.1992
Statistics relating to Export Credit
26
DBOD.No.BP.BC.58/C.469-91
07.12.1991
Delays Experienced by the Exporters at    Banks
27
IECD.No.EFD.17/003-SEM/91-92
31.08.1991
Financing of Exports
28
IECD.No.EFD.BC.40/819-POL- ECR-91
04.03.1991
Provision of Timely and Adequate Export    Credit
29
IECD.No.EFD/BC/35/819/POL- ECR/90-91
15.01.1991
Statistics relating to Export Credit
30
IECD.No.EFD.BC.191/819-POL- ECR-87
24.11.1987
Financing of Exports - Timely and Adequate    Provision of Export Credit
31
DBOD.No.BP.BC.47/C.469
(W)-87
08.10.1987
Problems Faced by Exporters
32
DBOD.No.BP.BC.73/C.469
(W)-84
02.08.1984
Problems Faced by Exporters
33
IECD.No.EFD.BC.24/819-POL- ECR-84
28.05.1984
Financing of Exports - Efficiency of Banks and Quality of Customer Services
34
DBOD.No.ECC.BC.67/C.297L(12)–81
02.06.1981
Statistics relating to Export Credit – Submission of Statements-
35
DBOD.ECC.BC.53/C.297P-78
17.04.1978
Financing of Exports - Need for Counselling Small Exporters and Exporters of Non-traditional Items
36
DBOD.BM.680/C.297K-69
07.04.1969
Opening of Export Counsel Offices by Banks
1
(ANBC is Net Bank  Credit (NBC) plus investments made by banks in non-SLR bonds held in Held to  Maturity (HTM) category. The achievement  of the banks would be assessed in terms of ANBC or credit equivalent amount of  Off-Balance Sheet Exposure (OBE), whichever is higher. The OBE for a number of banks (most of them  foreign banks) was at a much higher level. Further, FCNR (B) deposits and NRNR deposits are not deducted from NBC.)