(221 kb)
Master Circular – Housing Finance
RBI/2014-15/68
DBOD. No.DIR.BC.18/08.12.001/2014-15
July 1, 2014
Ashadha 10, 1936, (Saka)
All Scheduled Commercial Banks
(excluding RRBs)
Dear Sir/Madam,
Master Circular – Housing Finance
Please refer to the
Master Circular DBOD No. Dir. BC.17/08.12.001/2013-14 dated July 1, 2013
consolidating the instructions / guidelines issued to banks till June 30, 2013  relating to Housing Finance. The Master Circular has been suitably updated by incorporating the instructions issued up to June 30, 2014 and has also been placed on the RBI website (
http://www.rbi.org.in
). A copy of the
Master Circular
is enclosed.
Yours  faithfully
(Lily Vadera)
Chief General Manager
Encl: as above
CONTENTS
Sr.No.
Particulars
A
Purpose
B
Classification
C
Previous instructions consolidated
D
Scope of Application
Structure
1
Introduction
2
Direct Housing    Finance
3
Indirect Housing Finance
4
Housing Loans    under Priority Sector
5
RBI Refinance
6
Construction Activities eligible for    Bank Credit as Housing Finance
7
Construction Activities not    eligible for Bank Credit
8
Reporting
9
Home Loan Account Scheme (HLAS) of NHB
10
Bank's Exposure to Real    Estate Sector
11
Risk Weight on Housing Finance
12
Loan    to Value (LTV) Ratio
13
Innovative    Housing Loan Products-Upfront Disbursal of Housing Loans
14
Delhi    High Court Order on Unauthorized Construction
15
Terms    and Conditions for Banks Investments in Mortgage Backed Securities (MBS)
16
Annex : Financial assistance granted by    scheduled commercial banks under the category 'Housing Finance' as on    September 30/March 31
17
Appendix : Housing Finance circulars
Master  Circular – Housing Finance
A. Purpose
To consolidate framework  of rules/regulations and clarification on Housing Finance issued by Reserve  Bank of India from time to time.
B.
Classification
A statutory directive  issued by the Reserve Bank in exercise of the powers conferred by Sections 21  and 35 A  of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
C.
Previous instructions consolidated
This Master Circular  consolidates and updates all the instructions contained in Circulars listed in  the appendix and clarifications issued during the year.
D.
Scope of Application
Applicable to all  Scheduled Commercial Banks, excluding Regional Rural Banks.
Structure
Introduction
Direct Housing Finance
Indirect Housing Finance
Housing Loans Under       Priority Sector
RBI Refinance
Construction Activities Eligible For Bank Credit
Construction Activities Not Eligible For Bank       Credit
Reporting
Home Loan Account Scheme       (HLAS) for NHB
Banks' Exposure to Real       Estate Sector
Risk Weight on Housing       Finance
Loan to Value (LTV) Ratio
Innovative Housing Loan       Products- Upfront Disbursal of Housing Loans
Delhi High Court Order on       Unauthorized Construction
Terms and conditions for       Banks Investments in Mortgage Backed Securities (MBS)
Annex : Financial assistance granted by scheduled       commercial banks under the category 'Housing  Finance' as on September 30 /March 31
Appendix: Housing       Finance circulars
1.
INTRODUCTION
In pursuance of National  Housing Policy of Central Government, Reserve Bank of India has been  facilitating the flow of credit to housing sector. Since housing has emerged as  one of the sectors attracting a large quantum of bank finance, the current  focus of RBI's regulation is to ensure orderly growth of housing loan  portfolios of banks.
1.1.1
National Housing Policy
As part of the strategy  to overcome the colossal housing shortage, the Central Government adopted a  comprehensive National Housing Policy which, among other things, envisaged:
(i) development of a viable and accessible institutional system for  the provision of housing finance;
(ii) establishing a system where housing boards and development  authorities would concentrate on acquisition and development of land and  infrastructure; and
(iii) creation of conditions in which access to institutional finance is  made easier and affordable for individuals for construction/buying of  houses/flats. This may include outright  purchase of houses/flats constructed by or under the aegis of public agencies.
Banks with their vast  branch network throughout the length and breadth of the country occupy a very  strategic position in the financial system and were required to play an  important role in providing credit to the housing sector in consonance with the  National Housing Policy.
1.1.2
Housing Finance Allocation
Keeping in view the  objectives of National Housing Finance Policy, RBI was announcing minimum  housing finance allocation annually on the basis of the growth of deposits  recorded during the previous year till the year 2002-03. Banks could deploy their funds under the  housing finance allocation in any of the three categories, i.e.
(i) direct finance,
(ii) indirect finance,
(iii) investment in bonds of  NHB/HUDCO, or combination thereof.
2.
DIRECT HOUSING FINANCE
2.1 Direct Housing Finance refers to the  finance provided to individuals or groups of individuals including co-operative  societies.
2.2 Banks are free to evolve their own  guidelines with the approval of their Boards on aspects such as security, margin,  age of dwelling units, repayment schedule, etc.
2.3
Other Guidelines
The following types of bank finance may be included  under Direct Housing Finance:
(i) Bank  finance extended to a person who already owns a house in town/village where he  resides, for buying/ constructing a second house in the same or other town/  village for the purpose of self occupation.
(ii) Bank  finance extended for purchase of a house by a borrower who proposes to let it  out on rental basis on account of his posting outside the headquarters or  because he has been provided accommodation by his employer.
(iii) Bank  finance extended to a person who proposes to buy an old house where he is  presently residing as a tenant.
(iv) Bank finance granted only  for purchase of a plot, provided a declaration is obtained from the borrower  that he intends to construct a house on the said plot, with the help of bank  finance or otherwise, within such period as may be laid down by the banks  themselves.
(v) Supplementary finance
(a) Banks  may consider requests for additional finance within the overall ceiling for  carrying out alterations/ additions/repairs to the house/flat already financed  by them.
(b) In  the case of individuals who might have raised funds for construction/  acquisition of accommodation from other sources and need supplementary finance,  banks may extend such finance after obtaining
paripassu
or second mortgage charge over the property mortgaged in  favour of other lenders and/or against such other security, as they may deem  appropriate.
3.
INDIRECT HOUSING FINANCE
3.1
General
Banks should ensure  that their indirect housing finance is channeled by way of term loans to  housing finance institutions, housing boards, other public housing agencies,  etc., primarily for augmenting the supply of serviced land and constructed units.  It should also be ensured that the supply of plots/houses is time bound and  public agencies do not utilise the bank loans merely for acquisition of land.  Similarly, serviced plots should be sold by these agencies to co-operative  societies, professional developers and individuals with a stipulation that the  houses should be constructed thereon within a reasonable time, not exceeding  three years. For this purpose, the banks may take advantage of various  guidelines issued by NHB for augmenting the supply of serviced land and  constructed units.
3.2
Lending to Housing Intermediary Agencies
3.2.1
Lending to Housing Finance Institutions
(i) Banks  may grant term loans to housing finance institutions taking into account  (long-term) debt-equity ratio, track record, recovery performance and other  relevant factors.
(ii) In terms of NHB guidelines, housing finance  companies’ total borrowings, whether by way of deposits, issue of debentures/  bonds, loans and advances from banks or from financial institutions including  any loans obtained from NHB, should not exceed 16 times of their net owned  funds (i.e. paid-up capital and free reserves less accumulated balance of loss,  deferred revenue expenditure and intangible assets).
(iii) All housing finance companies registered with NHB are eligible to apply  for refinance 
            from  NHB and will be eligible subject to the refinance policy. The quantum of term loan to be sanctioned to  them will not be linked to net owned fund as NHB has already prescribed the above referred  ceiling on total borrowing of housing finance companies. A list of housing finance  companies registered with NHB may be obtained by the banks directly from NHB or downloaded from
www.nhb.org.in
.
3.2.2
Lending  to Housing Boards and Other Agencies
Banks may extend term loans to state level housing  boards and other public agencies. However, in order to develop a healthy  housing finance system, while doing so, the banks must not only keep in view  the past performance of these agencies in the matter of recovery from the  beneficiaries but they should also stipulate that the Boards will ensure prompt  and regular recovery of loan installments from the beneficiaries.
3.2.3
Financing  of Land Acquisition
In view of the need to increase the availability of land  and house sites for increasing the housing stock in the country, banks may  extend finance to public agencies and not private builders for acquisition and  development of land, provided it is a part of the complete project, including  development of infrastructure such as water systems, drainage, roads, provision  of electricity, etc. Such credit may be extended by way of term loans. The  project should be completed as early as possible and, in any case, within three  years, so as to ensure quick re-cycling of bank funds for optimum results. If  the project covers construction of houses, credit extended therefore in respect  of individual beneficiaries should be on the same terms and conditions as  stipulated for direct finance.
It has been observed that while financing real estate developers, certain  banks were found to be valuing the land for the purpose of security, on the  basis of the discounted value of the property after it is developed, less the  cost of development. This is not in  conformity with established norms. In  this connection, it is advised that banks should have a Board approved policy  in place for valuation of properties including collaterals accepted for their exposures  and that valuation should be done by professionally qualified independent valuers. As regards the valuation of land for the  purpose of financing of land acquisition as also land secured as collateral,  banks may be guided as under:
(a) Banks may extend finance to public agencies and not to private  builders for acquisition and development of land, provided it is a part of the  complete project, including development of infrastructure such as water  systems, drainage, roads, provision of electricity, etc. In such limited cases where land acquisition  can be financed, the finance is to be limited to the acquisition price (current  price) plus development cost. The  valuation of such land as prime security should be limited to the current  market price.
(b) Wherever land is accepted as collateral, valuation of  such land should be at the current market price only.
3.2.4
Terms  and Conditions for Lending to Housing Intermediary Agencies
(i) In order to  enhance the flow of resources to housing sector, term loans may be granted by  banks to housing intermediary agencies against the direct loans sanctioned/  proposed to be sanctioned by the latter, irrespective of the per borrower size  of the loan extended by these agencies.
(ii) Banks can  grant term loans to housing intermediary agencies against the direct loans  sanctioned/proposed to be sanctioned by them to Non-Resident Indians also.  However, banks should ensure that housing finance intermediary agencies being  financed by them, are authorised by RBI to grant housing loans to NRIs as all  housing finance intermediaries are not authorised by RBI to provide housing  finance to NRIs.
(iii) Banks have freedom to  charge interest rates to housing intermediary agencies without reference to  Benchmark Prime Lending Rates (BPLR) upto June 30, 2010. Under the Base Rate System effective from  July 1, 2010, all categories of loans will be priced with reference to Base  Rate which is the minimum interest rate for all loans.
3.3
Term  Loans to Private Builders
3.3.1 In view of the important  role played by professional builders as providers of construction services in  the housing field, especially where land is acquired and developed by State  Housing Boards and other public agencies, commercial banks may extend credit to  private builders on commercial terms by way of loans linked to each specific  project. However, the banks are not  permitted to extend fund based or non-fund based facilities to private builders  for acquisition of land even as part of a housing project. The period of credit for loans extended by  banks to private builders may be decided by banks themselves based on their  commercial judgement subject to usual safeguards and after obtaining such  security, as banks may deem appropriate. Such credit may be extended to  builders of repute, employing professionally qualified personnel. It should be  ensured, through close monitoring, that no part of such funds is used for any speculation in  land.
Care should also be taken to see that prices charged  from the ultimate beneficiaries do not include any speculative element, that  is, prices should be based only on the documented price of land, the actual  cost of construction and a reasonable profit margin.
3.3.2 It is advised that banks should adhere to  the National Building Code (NBC) formulated by the Bureau of Indian Standards  (BIS) in view of the importance of safety of buildings especially against  natural disasters. Banks may consider this aspect for incorporation in their  loan policies. Banks should also adopt the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA)  guidelines and suitably incorporate them as part of their loan policies,  procedures and documentation.
3.3.3 Incorporating clause in the terms and conditions to  disclose in Pamphlets / Brochures / advertisements information regarding  mortgage of property to the bank
In a  case which came up before the Hon’ble High Court of Judicature at Bombay, the  Hon’ble Court observed that the bank granting finance to housing / development projects should insist  on disclosure of the charge / or any other liability on the plot, in the  brochure, pamphlets etc., which may be published by developer / owner inviting  public at large to purchase flats and properties. The Court also added that  this obviously would be part of the terms and conditions on which the loan may  be sanctioned by the bank. Keeping in view the above,  while granting finance to specific housing / development projects, banks are  advised to stipulate as a part of the terms and conditions that:
(i) the  builder / developer / company would disclose in the Pamphlets / Brochures etc.,  the name(s) of the bank(s) to which the property is mortgaged.
(ii) the  builder / developer / company would append the information relating to mortgage  while publishing advertisement of a particular scheme in newspapers / magazines  etc.
(iii) the builder / developer / company  would indicate in their pamphlets / brochures, that they would provide No  Objection Certificate (NOC) / permission of the mortgagee bank for sale of  flats / property, if required.
Banks are also  advised to ensure compliance of the above terms and conditions and funds should  not be released unless the builder/developer/company fulfils the above  requirements.
On a review, it  has been decided that the above mentioned provisions will be mutatis-mutandis,  applicable to Commercial Real Estate also.
4.
HOUSING LOANS UNDER  PRIORITY SECTOR
Banks may refer to the Master Circular on Lending to  Priority Sector issued by Rural Planning and Credit Department.
5.
RBI REFINANCE
Finance provided by the banks would not be eligible for  refinance from Reserve Bank.
6.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES ELIGIBLE FOR  BANK CREDIT AS HOUSING FINANCE
The following types of bank credit  will be eligible for being treated as housing finance:
(i) Loans  to individuals for purchase/construction of dwelling unit per family and loans  given for repairs to the damaged dwelling units of families;
(ii) Finance  provided for construction of residential houses to be constructed by public  housing agencies like HUDCO, Housing Boards, local bodies, individuals,  co-operative societies, employers, priority being accorded for financing  construction of houses meant for economically weaker sections, low income group  and middle income group;
(iii) Finance  for construction of educational, health, social, cultural or other  institutions/centers, which are part of a housing project and which are  necessary for the development of settlements or townships;
(iv) Finance  for shopping complexes, markets and such other centers catering to the day to  day needs of the residents of the housing colonies and forming part of a  housing project;
(v) Finance  for construction meant for improving the conditions in slum areas for which  credit may be extended directly to the slum-dwellers on the guarantee of the  Government, or indirectly to them through the State Governments;
(vi) Bank  credit given for slum improvement schemes to be implemented by Slum Clearance  Boards and other public agencies;
(vii) Finance  provided to –
the  bodies constituted for undertaking repairs to houses, and
the  owners of building/house/flat, whether occupied by themselves or by tenants, to  meet the need-based requirements for their repairs/additions, after satisfying  themselves regarding the estimated cost (for which requisite certificate should  be obtained from an Engineer/Architect, wherever necessary) and obtaining such  security as deemed appropriate;
(viii) Housing  finance provided by banks for which refinance is availed of from National  Housing Bank (NHB);
(ix) Investment  in the guarantee/non-guaranteed bonds and debentures of NHB/HUDCO in the  primary market, provided investment in non-guaranteed bonds is made only if  guaranteed bonds are not available.
7.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES NOT ELIGIBLE FOR BANK CREDIT
7.1 Banks should not grant finance for construction of buildings  meant purely for Government/Semi-Government offices, including Municipal and  Panchayat offices. However, banks may grant loans for activities, which will be  refinanced by institutions like NABARD.
7.2 Projects undertaken by public sector  entities which are not corporate bodies (i.e. public sector undertakings which  are not registered under Companies Act or which are not Corporations  established under the relevant statute) may not be financed by banks. Even in  respect of projects undertaken by corporate bodies, as defined above, banks  should satisfy themselves that the project is run on commercial lines and that  bank finance is not in lieu of or to substitute budgetary resources envisaged  for the project. The loan could, however, supplement budgetary resources if  such supplementing was contemplated in the project design. Thus, in the case of  a housing project, where the project is run on commercial lines, and the  Government is interested in promoting the project either for the benefit of the  weaker sections of the society or otherwise, and a part of the project cost is  met by the Government through subsidies made available and/or contributions to  the capital of the institutions taking up the project, the bank finance should  be restricted to an amount arrived at after reducing from the total project  cost the amount of subsidy/capital contribution receivable from the Government  and any other resources proposed to be made available by the Government.
7.3 Banks had, in the past, sanctioned term  loans to Corporations set up by Government like State Police Housing Corporation,  for construction of residential quarters for allotment to employees where the  loans were envisaged to be repaid out of budgetary allocations. As these  projects cannot be considered to be run on commercial lines, it would not be in  order for banks to grant loans to such projects.
8.
REPORTING
Banks should compile the data relating to Housing  Finance at half-yearly intervals on the lines of format given in
Annex
and keep it ready for being made available to the bank’s internal  inspectors/RBI’s inspectors.
9.
HOME  LOAN ACCOUNT SCHEME (HLAS) OF NHB
9.1
Foreclosure of Loans Obtained from Other  Sources
9.1.1 Under the HLAS, a member of HLAS is eligible  for a loan after subscription to the scheme for a minimum period of 5 years.  The member has to declare while joining the scheme/availing loan that he/ she  does not own a house/flat. However, a member may acquire a house or a flat from  a public agency/co-operative/ private builder by obtaining a loan from a bank  at the normal rate of interest or from friends and relatives or through a  hire-purchase scheme of Housing Board/ Development Authority. Thereafter, when  the member becomes eligible for a loan under HLAS, he/she may approach the bank  for such a loan to repay the loan(s) raised earlier from other sources.
9.1.2 There is no objection to bank loans under  HLAS being utilised for foreclosing loans secured earlier from other sources,  as a special case.
9.2
Classification of  Deposits/Loans under HLAS
Under HLAS, the  participating bank is required to accept deposits on behalf of NHB and make use  of these deposits by way of refinance under any scheme approved by NHB from  time to time. The surplus funds, if any, not so utilised (i.e. excess of  deposits over refinance) can either be remitted by the participating bank to  NHB or retained by it, subject to compliance with the statutory reserve  requirements as under:
(i) The deposits under the HLA Scheme are on a  recurring basis; and they should be treated as ‘time’ liabilities, subject to  reserve requirements under Section 42(1) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934  as also under Section 24 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 and included under  item II (a) (ii) of Form ‘A’.
(ii) In terms of sub-clause (ii) of clause I of  the Explanation to Sub-Section (1) of Section 42 of the RBI Act, as amended by  clause 3 of the Second Schedule to the National Housing Bank Act, 1987,  ‘liabilities’ will not include any loan taken from NHB. Hence, the deposits  utilised as refinance from NHB should be deducted from the total deposits received  under the HLA Scheme while including the amount under item II (a) (ii) of Form  ‘A’.
10.
BANK'S EXPOSURE TO REAL ESTATE SECTOR
(i) While  the development of real estate is welcome, there is a need for the banks to  curb the excessively risky lending by exercising selectivity and strengthening  the loan approval process. Banks should  ensure that the borrowers should have obtained prior permission from  government/local governments/other statutory authorities for the project,  wherever required. While the proposals  could be sanctioned in normal course, the disbursements should be made only  after the borrower has obtained requisite clearances from the government  authorities.
(ii) As  loans to the residential housing projects under the Commercial Real Estate  (CRE) Sector exhibit lesser risk and volatility than the CRE Sector taken as a  whole, it has been decided to carve out a separate sub-sector called Commercial  Real Estate - Residential Housing (CRE-RH) from the CRE Sector. CRE-RH would  consist of loans to builders / developers for residential housing projects  (except for captive consumption) under CRE segment. Such projects should  ordinarily not include non-residential commercial real estate. However,  integrated housing projects comprising of some commercial space (e.g. shopping  complex, school, etc.) can also be classified under CRE-RH, provided that the  commercial area in the residential housing project does not exceed 10% of the  total Floor Space Index (FSI) of the project. In case the FSI of the commercial  area in the predominantly residential housing complex exceeds the ceiling of  10%, the project loans should be classified as CRE and not CRE-RH.
11.
RISK WEIGHT ON HOUSING FINANCE
Banks may refer  to Master Circular on Basel III Capital Regulations.
12.
LOAN TO VALUE (LTV) RATIO
12.1 As per earlier instructions, the  LTV ratio in respect of housing loans should not exceed 80 per cent. However,  for small value housing loans i.e. housing loans up to 20 lakh (which get categorized as priority  sector advances), the LTV ratio should not exceed 90 per cent.
12.2 With effect from June 21, 2013  these norms have been revised and the following LTV ratios have to be  maintained by banks in respect of individual housing loans.
Category of Loan
LTV Ratio (%)
(a) Individual Housing    Loans
Upto
`
20 lakh
90
Above
`
20 lakh & upto
`
75 lakh
80
Above
`
75 lakh
75
(b) CRE – RH
NA
12.3 The LTV ratio should not exceed  the prescribed ceiling in all fresh cases of sanction. In case the LTV ratio is  currently above the ceiling prescribed for any reasons, efforts should be made  to bring it within limits.
12.4 It has been brought  to our notice that banks adopt different practices for deciding the value of  the house property while sanctioning housing loans. Some banks include stamp duty,  registration and other documentation charges in the cost of the house property.  This overstates the realisable value of the property as stamp duty,  registration and other documentation charges are not realisable and  consequently the margin stipulated gets diluted. Accordingly, banks should not  include these charges in the cost of the housing property they finance so that  the effectiveness of LTV norms is not diluted.
13.
INNOVATIVE  HOUSING LOAN PRODUCTS – UPFRONT DISBURSAL OF HOUSING LOANS
13.1 It has been observed that some banks have introduced certain  innovative Housing Loan Schemes in association with developers / builders, e.g.  upfront disbursal of sanctioned individual housing loans to the builders  without linking the disbursals to various stages of construction of housing  project, interest / EMI on the housing loan availed of by the individual  borrower being serviced by the builders during the construction period /  specified period, etc. This might include signing of tripartite agreements between  the bank, the builder and the buyer of the housing unit. These loan products  are popularly known by various names like 80:20, 75:25 Schemes.
13.2 Such housing loan products are likely to expose the banks as well as  their home loan borrowers to additional risks e.g. in case of disputes between  individual borrowers and developers / builders, default / delayed payment of  interest / EMI by the developer / builder during the agreed period on behalf of  the borrower, non-completion of the project on time, etc. Further, any delayed  payments by developers / builders on behalf of individual borrowers to banks  may lead to lower credit rating / scoring of such borrowers by credit  information companies (CICs) as information about servicing of loans gets  passed on to the CICs on a regular basis. In cases where bank loans are also  disbursed upfront on behalf of their individual borrowers in a lump-sum to  builders / developers without any linkage to stages of construction, banks run  disproportionately higher exposures with concomitant risks of diversion of  funds.
13.3 In view of the higher risks associated with such lump-sum disbursal  of sanctioned housing loans and customer suitability issues, banks are advised  that disbursal of housing loans sanctioned to individuals should be closely  linked to the stages of construction of the housing project / houses and  upfront disbursal should not be made in cases of incomplete /  under-construction / green field housing projects.
13.4 It is emphasized that banks  while introducing any kind of product should take into account the customer  suitability and appropriateness issues and also ensure that the borrowers /  customers are made fully aware of the risks and liabilities under such  products.
14.
DELHI HIGH COURT ORDER ON  UNAUTHORISED CONSTRUCTION
The  Monitoring Committee constituted by the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi regarding  Unauthorised Construction, Misuse of Properties and Encroachment on Public  Land, has issued the following directions for immediate compliance by the  banks/ Financial Institutions.
A.
Housing  Loan for building construction
i)  In cases where the applicant owns a plot/land and approaches the banks/FIs for  a credit facility to construct a house, a copy of the sanctioned plan by  competent authority in the name of a person applying for such credit facility  must be obtained by the Banks/FIs before sanctioning the home loan.
ii)  An affidavit-cum-undertaking must be obtained from the person applying for such  credit facility that he shall not violate the sanctioned plan, construction  shall be strictly as per the sanctioned plan and it shall be the sole  responsibility of the executants to obtain completion certificate within 3  months of completion of construction, failing which the bank shall have the  power and the authority to recall the entire loan with interest, costs and  other usual bank charges.
iii)  An Architect appointed by the bank must also certify at various stages of  construction of building that the construction of the building is strictly as  per sanctioned plan and shall also certify at a particular point of time that  the completion certificate of the building issued by the competent authority  has been obtained.
B.
Housing Loan for purchase of  constructed property/ built up property
i)  In cases where the applicant approaches the bank/FIs for a credit facility to  purchase the built up house/flat, it should be mandatory for him to declare by  way of an affidavit-cum-undertaking that the built up property has been  constructed as per the sanctioned plan and/or building bye-laws and as far as  possible has a completion certificate also.
ii)  An Architect appointed by the bank must also certify before disbursement of the  loan that the built up property is strictly as per sanctioned plan and/or  building bye-laws.
C.
Unauthorised colonies
No  loan should be given in respect of those properties which fall in the category  of unauthorized colonies unless and until they have been regularized and  development and other charges paid.
D.
Commercial Property
No  loan should also be given in respect of properties meant for residential use  but which the applicant intends to use for commercial purposes and declares so  while applying for loan.
15
TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR BANKS’  INVESTMENT IN MORTGAGE BACKED  SECURITIES (MBS)
15.1 Banks’ investments in MBS  should satisfy the following terms and conditions:
(i) The right, title, and interest of an HFC in securitised housing  loans and receivables there under should irrevocably be assigned in favour of a  Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) / Trust.
(ii) Mortgaged securities underlying the securitised housing loans  should be held exclusively on behalf of and for the benefit of the investors by  the SPV/Trust.
(iii) The SPV or Trust should be entitled to the  receivables under the securitised loans with an arrangement for distribution of  the same to the investors as per the terms of the issue of MBS. Such an  arrangement may provide for appointment of the originating HFC as the servicing  and paying agent. However, the originating HFC participating in a  securitisation transaction as a seller, manager, servicer or provider of credit  enhancement of liquidity facilities,
shall  not own any share capital in the SPV or be the beneficiary of the Trust used as  a vehicle for the purchase and securitisation of assets. Share capital for this  purpose shall include all classes of common and preferred share capital.
shall not name the SPV in such manner as to  imply any connection with the bank.
shall not have any directors, officers, or  employees on the board of the SPV unless the board is made of at least three  members and where there is a majority of independent directors. In addition,  the official (s) representing the bank will not have veto powers.
shall not directly or indirectly control the  SPV, or
shall not support any losses arising from  the securitisation transaction or by investors involved in it or bear any of  the recurring expenses of the transaction.
(iv) The loans to be securitised should be  loans advanced to individuals for acquiring/constructing residential houses which should have been mortgaged to the  HFC by way of exclusive first charge.
(v) The loans to be securitised should be  accorded an investment grade credit rating by any of the credit rating  agencies at the time of assignment to the SPV.
(vi) The investors should be entitled to call  upon the issuer-SPV to take steps for recovery in the event of default and  distribute the net proceeds to the investors as per the terms of issue of MBS.
(vii) The SPV undertaking the issue of MBS should  not be engaged in any business other than the business of issue and  administration of MBS of individual housing loans.
(viii) The SPV or Trustees  appointed to manage the issue of MBS should have to be governed by the provisions of Indian  Trust Act, 1882.
15.2 If the issue of MBS is in accordance with the terms and  conditions stated in above paragraph and includes irrevocable transfer of risk  and reward of housing loan assets to the SPV / Trust, investment in such MBS by  any bank would not be reckoned as an exposure on the HFC originating the  securitised housing loan. However, it would be treated as an exposure on the  underlying assets of the SPV/ Trust.
Appendix
List of Circulars  consolidated by Master Circular on Housing Finance
Sl.
Circular No.
Date
Subject
1
DBOD.BP,BC.No.51/08.12.015/2013-14
03.09.2013
Innovative Housing Loan Products- Upfront    Disbursal of Housing Loans
2
DBOD.BP.BC.No.104/08.12.015/2012-13
21.06.13
Housing Sector: New Sub-sector CRE(Residential Housing) within CRE and Rationalisation of provisioning, risk, weight and LTV ratio.
3
DBOD.No.BP.BC.78/08.12.001/2011-12
03.02.12
Housing loans by Commercial Banks-Loan to Value (LTV) Ratio
4
DBOD.BP.BC.No.45/08.12.015/2011-12
03.11.11
Guidelines on Commercial Real Estate(CRE)
5
DBOD.Dir.BC.No.93    /08.12.14/ 2010-11
12.05.11
National Disaster Management Guidelines on Ensuring Disaster Resilient    construction of Buildings and Infrastructure.
6
DBOD.No.BP.BC.69/08.12.001/2010-11
23.12.10
Housing    Loans by Commercial Banks - LTV Ratio, Risk Weight and Provisioning
7
DBOD.No.    Dir(Hsg). BC.31/08.12.001/2009-10
27.08.09
Finance for Housing Projects –    Incorporating clause in the terms and conditions to disclose in Pamphlets /    Brochures / advertisements information regarding mortgage of property to the    bank.
8
DBOD.Dir.(Hsg.)BC.27/08.12.01/2007-08
22.08.07
Discontinuance of quarterly statement on housing finance disbursements
9
DBOD.Dir.BC.No.43/    21.01.002/2006-07
17.11.06
Housing Loans- Orders of the Delhi High Court – Writ Petition by Kalyan    Sanstha Welfare Organisation against Union of India and Others –    Implementation of Directions
10
DBOD.BP.BC.1711/08.12.14/2005-06
12.06.06
Adherence to National Building Code (NBC) Specifications necessary for    lending institutes
11
DBOD.    No.BP.BC.65/08.12.01/2005-06
01.03.06
Banks' Exposures    to Real Estate Sector
12
DBOD.BP.BC.61/21.01.002/2004-05
23.12.04
Mid-Term Review of the Annual Policy Statement for the year 2004-05-Risk Weight on housing loans and consumer credit
13
RPCD. No. Plan. BC. 64/ 04.09.01/ 2004-05
15.12.04
Priority Sector Lending- Investment in special bonds issued by specified institutions
14
RPCD.PLNFS.BC.No.    44/ 06.11.01/ 2004-05
26.10.04
Priority Sector Lending-Housing Loan: Enhancement of Ceiling
15
DBOD(IECS).No.4/    03.27.25/ 2004-05
03.07.04
Freedom granted to banks to lay down the period within which the borrowers are required to    construct the house on the plot    purchased
16
IECD.    No. 14/ 01.01.43/ 2003-04
30.06.04
Merger of functions of IECD with other departments
17
RPCD.    No. PLNFS. BC. 92/ 06.11.01/ 2002-03
29.04.03
Priority Sector    Advances – Loans for Housing
18
RPCD.No.PLNFS.BC.    30/06.11.01/2002-03
29.10.02
Priority Sector    Advances-Repairs to damaged houses in Rural and other areas
19
DBOD.No.BP.BC.106/    21.01.002/ 2001-02
14.05.02
Risk Weight on    Housing Finance and Mortgage Backed Securities
20
IECD.No.(HF)5/03:27:    25/ 99-2000
29.10.99
Housing Finance –    Modification in Loan Size
21
IECD.No.(HF)12/    03.27.25/98-99
15.01.99
Terms and    Conditions Governing Direct Finance for Purchase of Old House
22
IECD.No.(HF) 40/03.27.25/97-98
16.04.98
Terms and    Conditions Governing Direct Housing Loans - Review of Parameters
23
IECD.No.HF.37/    03.27.25/97-98
27.02.98
Submission of    Half-yearly Housing Finance Statements – Discontinuance
24
IECD.No.HF.    22/03.27.25/97-98
06.12.97
Housing Finance –    Modification in Loan Size
25
RPCD. No. PLNFS.    BC. 37/ 06.11.01/ 97-98
21.10.97
Priority Sector    Advances- Loans for Housing
26
IECD.No.5/03.27.25/97-98
30.08.97
Quantum of Bank    Finance to Housing Finance Companies Entitled to Draw Refinance from National    Housing Bank (NHB)
27
IECD.No.CMD.    8/03:27:25/95-96
27.09.95
Sanction of Term    Loans for Housing Projects Involving Budgetary Support from Government -    Non-Permissibility of
28
IECD.No.1/03.27.25/94-95
11.07.94
Direct Housing    Finance
29
DBOD.No.BL.BC.    132/C.168(M)-91
11.06.91
Opening of    Specialised Housing Finance Branches
30
DBOD.No.BP.BC.88/60-90
05.04.90
Home Loan Account    Scheme (HLAS) of National Housing Bank - Foreclosure of Loans Obtained from    Other Sources
31
IECD.No.CMD.IV.    24/HF(P)-89/90
30.03.90
Housing Finance
32
DBOD.No.BP.1074/BP.60-90
23.03.90
Housing Finance - Designation of Specific Branches
33
DBOD.No.BP.1022/BP.60-90
15.03.90
Housing Finance -    Designation of Specific Branches
34
DBOD. No. Ret.BC.    75/ C.96-90
13.02.90
The Reserve Bank    of India Scheduled Banks Regulation, 1951- Classifiation of Deposits Accepted    under the Home Loan Account Scheme of the National Housing Bank
35
IECD.No.CAD.IV.    223/(HF-P)- 88/89
02.11.88
Housing Finance – Modifications on
the basis of the recommendations of
the Study Group on Housing Finance Institutions
36
DBOD.No.CAS.BC.    70/C.446(HF-P)-81
05.06.81
Housing Finance -    Revised Guidelines (General)
37
DBOD.No.CAS.BC.71/    C.446(HF-P)-79
31.05.79
Housing Finance -    Recommendations of the Working Group to Examine the Role of Banking System in    Providing Finance for Housing Scheme