(130 kb)
Master Circular - Guidelines for Relief Measures by Banks in Areas Affected by Natural Calamities
RBI/2014-15/84
RPCD.No.FSD.BC 07/05.04.02/2014-15
July  1, 2014
The  Chairman/Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer
All  scheduled commercial banks (excluding Regional Rural Banks)
Madam  / Dear Sir,
MASTER  CIRCULAR - GUIDELINES FOR RELIEF MEASURES BY BANKS IN
AREAS AFFECTED BY NATURAL
      CALAMITIES
Please  refer to our
Master  Circular RPCD.No.PLFS.BC.6/05.04.02/2013-14 dated July 1, 2013
,  incorporating guidelines issued to banks in regard to matters relating to  relief measures to be provided in areas affected by natural calamities.
Master  Circular for 2014-15, incorporating the existing guidelines/ instructions on  the subject, has been prepared and is appended. The list of circulars compiled  into this Master Circular is given in the
Appendix
.
Please  acknowledge receipt.
Yours  faithfully,
(Madhavi Sharma)
Chief General Manager
GUIDELINES FOR RELIEF  MEASURES BY BANKS IN AREAS AFFECTED BY
NATURAL CALAMITIES
Periodical but frequent  occurrence of droughts, floods, cyclones, tidal waves and other natural  calamities takes a heavy toll of human life and causes wide spread damage to  economic pursuits of human beings in one area or the other of our country. The  devastation caused by such natural calamities call for massive rehabilitation  efforts by all agencies. The State and local authorities draw programmes for  economic rehabilitation of the affected people. The developmental role assigned  to the commercial banks and co-operative banks, warrants their active support  in revival of the economic activities.
2. Since the area and time of  occurrence and intensity of natural calamities cannot be anticipated, it is  imperative that the banks have a blueprint of action in such eventualities so  that the required relief and assistance is provided with utmost speed and  without any loss of time. This pre-supposes that all the branches of commercial  banks and their Regional and Zonal Offices will have a set of standing  instructions spelling out the action that the branches will have to initiate in  the calamity affected areas immediately after the requisite declaration by the  district/ state authorities. It is necessary that these instructions should  also be available with the State Government authorities and all the District  Collectors so that all concerned are clear as to the action that would be taken  by the banks’ branches in the affected areas.
3. The precise details in  regard to the provision of credit assistance by the commercial banks will  depend on the requirements of the situation, their own operational capabilities  and the actual needs of the borrowers. This can be decided by them in  consultation with the district authorities.
4. Nevertheless, to enable  banks to take uniform and concerted action expeditiously, particularly to provide  financial assistance to agriculturists, small scale industrial units, artisans,  small business and trading establishments affected by natural calamities, the  following guidelines are commended.
I. Institutional  arrangements:
a. Meeting of District  Consultative Committee
5. To facilitate coordination  and expeditious action by the financing institutions, the conveners of the  District Consultative Committees of the affected districts should convene a  meeting immediately after the occurrence of natural calamities. In the event of  the calamity covering a larger part of a State, the convener of the State Level  Bankers’ Committee will also convene a meeting immediately to evolve a  coordinated action plan for implementation of the relief programme in collaboration  with the State/ district authorities. While determining the quantum of  assistance required by a person affected by the natural calamity, the banks may  take into consideration the assistance/subsidy received by him from the state  Government and/or other agencies.
b. Special SLBC Meeting
6. Immediately upon occurrence  of a natural calamity, special SLBC meeting may be convened to review the  position in the affected areas and ensure speedy formulation and implementation  of suitable relief measures by banks.
7. The banks may also give  adequate publicity to their disaster management arrangements, including the  helpline numbers. The relief measures initiated and undertaken may be reviewed  periodically in the weekly/fortnightly meetings of specially constituted Task  Forces or sub Committees of the SLBC till such time as conditions are  normalized.
c. Proactive approach
8. In order to avoid delay in  taking relief measures on the occurrence of natural calamity, banks may evolve  a suitable policy framework in this regard with the approval of the Board of  Directors and forward a copy of the policy note for our record. It is advisable  to provide an element of flexibility in the measures so as to synchronise the  same with the measures which could be appropriate in a given situation in a  particular State or District and parameters in this regard may be decided in  consultation with SLBC/ DCC, as the case may be.
d. Discretionary Powers to  Divisional / Zonal Manager of banks
9. Divisional/ Zonal Managers  of commercial banks should be vested with certain discretionary powers so that  they do not have to seek fresh approvals from their Central Offices to the line  of action agreed to by the District/ State Level Bankers’ Committees. For  example, such discretionary powers would be necessary in regard to adoption of  scales of finance, extension of loan periods, sanction of new loans keeping in  view the total liability of the borrower (i.e. arising out of the old loan  where the assets financed are damaged or lost on account of natural calamity as  well as the new loan for creation/repair of such assets), margin, security,  etc.
e. Identification of the  beneficiaries
10. The bank branches should  obtain from the Government authorities concerned lists of affected villages within  their area of operation. From among the identified persons, assessment of loss  sustained by the existing constituents of the banks would be easier. In the  case of fresh borrowers, however, discreet enquiries should be made in this  regard and assistance of the Government authorities should be sought wherever  available for ascertaining genuineness of their requirements. For providing  conversion facilities in respect of crop loans, procedure for identification of  areas where such facilities have to be provided has been indicated under crop  loans in paragraph (g) below.
f. Coverage
11. Each branch will provide  credit assistance not only to its existing borrowers but also to other eligible  persons within its command area provided they are not covered by any other  financial agency.
12. Credit requirements of the  borrowing members of the cooperatives will be met by the Primary Agricultural  Co-operative Societies (PACS)/ LAMPS/ FSS, etc. Branches of commercial banks  may, however, finance the non-borrowing members of the co-operative societies,  for which the latter will issue the usual `No objection’ certificates speedily.
g. Priorities
13. Immediate assistance  including finances would be needed for protecting and rejuvenating standing  crops/ orchards/ plantation, etc. Equally important will be repairs to and  protection of live stock sheds, grains and fodder storage structures, drainage,  pumping, and other measures and operations to repair pump sets, motors, engines  and other necessary implements. Subject to seasonal requirements, next crop  financing should be taken up.
II.
Agricultural loans :
14. The bank assistance in  relation to agriculture would be needed in the form of short term loans for the  purpose of raising crops (crop loans) and term loans for purchase of milch/  draught animals, repairs to existing tube wells and pump sets, digging of new  tube wells and installation of new pump sets, land reclamation, silt/sand  removal, protection and rejuvenation of standing crops/ orchards/ plantation,  etc., repairs and protection of livestock sheds, grain and fodder storage  structures, etc. Banks may, of their own, decide the quantum of fresh loans to  be granted to the affected borrowers taking into consideration, amongst others,  the extent of the crop loss/ scale of finance and their repaying capacity.
A.
Crop loans
a. Identification of loss
15. In the case of natural  calamities, such as droughts, floods, etc., the Government authorities would  have declared
annewari
to indicate the extent to which the crops are  damaged. However, where such declaration has not been made, banks should not  delay in providing conversion facilities, and the District Collector’s  Certificate that crop yield is below 50% of the normal yield, supported by the  views of the DCC in the matter (for which a special meeting may have to be  convened), should be sufficient for invoking quick relief arrangements. The  certificate of the Collector should be issued crop-wise covering all crops,  including food-grains. Issuing of such certificates in respect of cash crops,  may, however, be left to the discretion of the Collector. Alternatively, the  District Collector, on occurrence of the natural calamity such as drought,  flood etc., may ask the Lead Bank Officer to convene a meeting of the DCC, and  submit a report to the DCC on the extent of crop loss in the area affected by  the natural calamity. If the DCC is satisfied that there has been extensive  crop loss on account of the natural calamity, the relief including  conversion/restructuring facilities of agricultural loans as per the standing  guidelines may be extended to the farmers affected by the natural calamity, without
declaring annewari.
b. Issuance of fresh loans and  restructuring of existing loans
16. The financial assistance  required by borrowers in the event of natural calamity would include:
(i) consumption loans
(ii) fresh loans for  resumption of normal business
(iii) restructuring of the existing loans.
(i) Consumption Loans
17. Loans to existing  borrowers for general consumption purposes may be sanctioned up to Rs 10000/-  without any collateral. The limit may, however be enhanced beyond Rs.10,000/-  at the discretion of the bank.
(ii) Fresh Loans
18. Timely fresh financial  assistance to resume productive activities may be provided not only to the  existing borrowers, but also to other eligible borrowers. Notwithstanding the  status of the existing account, fresh loans granted to the borrowers will be  treated as current dues.
(iii) Restructuring of  existing loans
19. As the repaying capacity  of the people affected by natural calamities gets severely impaired due to the  damage to the economic pursuits and loss of economic assets, relief in  repayment of loans becomes necessary in areas affected by natural calamity and  hence, restructuring of the existing loans will be required. The principal  amount of the short-term loan as well as interest due for repayment in the year  of occurrence of natural calamity may be converted into term loan. In case of  term loans the instalment of principal and interest due in the year of  occurrence of natural calamity may also be converted into term loan.
20. The repayment period of  restructured term loan may vary depending on the severity of calamity and its  recurrence, the extent of loss of economic assets and distress caused.  Generally, the restructured period for repayment may be 3 to 5 years. However,  where the damage arising out of the calamity is very severe, banks may, at  their discretion, extend the period of repayment ranging up to 7 years and in extreme  cases of hardship, the repayment period may be prolonged up to a maximum period  of 10 years in consultation with the Task Force/ SLBC.
21. In all cases of  restructuring, moratorium period of at least one year should be considered.  Further, the banks should not insist for additional collateral security for  such restructured loans. Asset classification for restructured loans will  remain the same as prevalent at the time of restructuring for a period of one  year as per extant guidelines for restructured loans. The asset classification  status of these loans will be as under:
a) The restructured portion of  the short term loans and term loans which have been converted into fresh loans  may be treated as current dues and need not be classified as NPA. The asset  classification of these fresh term loans would thereafter be governed by the  revised terms and conditions and would be treated as NPA if interest and / or  installment of principal remains overdue for two crop seasons for short  duration crops and for one crop season for long duration crops.
b) The asset classification of  the remaining amount due, which have not been restructured, will continue to be  governed by the original terms and conditions. Consequently, the dues from the  borrower may be classified by the lending bank under different asset  classification categories viz. standard, sub-standard, doubtful, loss
c) Additional finance, if any,  may be treated as “standard asset” and its future asset classification will be  governed by the terms and conditions of its sanction.
22. Lending and other norms  may be relaxed by banks, at their discretion, for the Self Help Groups affected  in a natural calamity. Similarly, in retail or consumer loans segment, the  banks may restructure the loans in a manner suitable to the borrowers on a  case-to-case basis.
23. i. Asset classification of  the restructured accounts as on the date of natural calamity will continue if  the restructuring is completed within a period of three months from the date of  natural calamity.
ii. The accounts that are  restructured for the second time or more on account of natural calamities would  retain the same asset classification category on restructuring. Accordingly,  for once restructured standard asset, the subsequent restructuring necessitated  on account of natural calamity would not be treated as second restructuring,  i.e., the standard asset classification will be allowed to be maintained. All  other restructuring norms, however, will apply.
c. Other guidelines for  providing conversion facilities
24. i. As far as possible, it  would be preferable to prescribe common due dates for payment of installments  of the converted loan and extended term loans.
ii. All short-term loans,  except those, which are overdue at the time of occurrence of natural calamity,  should be eligible for conversion facilities.
iii. Pending conversion of  short-term loans, banks may grant fresh crop loans to the affected farmers.
iv. Conversion of short-term  production loans may be taken up by banks at the time of sanction of fresh crop  loans to the affected farmers without waiting for the due dates, which are  taken into account in normal course of sanction of such loans.
v. Similarly, installments of  principal/ interest in respect of term loans may be rescheduled for a period of  3 years, which could be extended for longer period in the circumstances,  mentioned at para 15 above.
vi. The rates of interest on  the converted loans should be the same as that charged on short-term loans and  as governed by DBOD Master Circular on ‘Interest Rates on Advances’ (
DBOD.  No.Dir.BC.5/13.03.00/2012-13 dated July 2,2012
).
vii. Where relief in the form  of conversion/ reschedulement of loans is extended to the farmers, such  converted/rescheduled dues should be treated as current dues and banks should  not compound interest in respect of the loans so converted/rescheduled.
d. Fast relief
25. To be effective, the  assistance to farmers will have to be disbursed with utmost speed. For this  purpose the lead bank and the district authorities concerned should evolve a  procedure whereby identification of borrowers, issuance of certificates  regarding Government/ co-operative/ bank dues, title of the applicant to land  etc. is secured simultaneously.
26. Possibilities of  organising credit camps, where Block Development and Revenue officials,  Co-operative Inspectors, Panchayat Pradhans, etc. could help finalise the  applications on the spot, could be explored in consultation with the  authorities of the district where such credit camps are being organised. The  State Government will also arrange with the Collectors to issue an executive  order enabling the following officers or their authorised representatives to  assume respective duties and responsibilities as envisaged under implementation  of credit camps programme:
a. Block Development Officer
b. Co-operative Inspector
c. Revenue Authority/ Village Revenue Assistant
d. Bank official operating in the area
e. PACS/ LAMPS/ FSS
f. Gram Panchayat Pradhan
In order to avoid delay, the  forms in which the State Government Officers have to give certificates at the  Credit Camps may be got printed in sufficient numbers by the respective  District Magistrates.
27. In considering loan  applications for the ensuing crop season, the current dues of the applicants to  the State Government may be ignored, provided the State Government declare a  moratorium for a sufficiently long period on all amounts due to the government  as on the date of occurrence of the natural calamity.
e. Scale of Finance
28. Scales of finance in  respect of different crops will be uniform in a district. The scales will be  fixed taking into account the prevailing conditions and norms presently adopted  by different lending agencies. In fixing the scales, minimum consumption needs  of borrowers will be taken into account. The concerned District Magistrates and  Managers of branches of banks operating in the districts would be advised to  adopt the scales so laid down.
B.
Development Loans -  Investment costs
29. The existing term loan  installments will have to be rescheduled/ postponed keeping in view the  repaying capacity of the borrowers and the nature of natural calamity viz.,
i. Droughts, floods or  cyclones, etc. where only crop for that year is damaged and productive assets  are not damaged.
ii. Floods or cyclones where  the productive assets are partially or totally damaged and borrowers are in  need of a new loan.
30. In regard to natural  calamity under category (i) the banks may postpone the payment of installment  during the year of natural calamity and extend the loan period by one year,  subject to the following exceptions:
a. Those cultivators who had  not effected the development or investment for which the loan was obtained or  had disposed of the equipments or machinery purchased out of the loan;
b. Those who are income tax  payers;
c. In the case of drought,  those who are having perennial sources of irrigation except where water supply  was not released from canals or irrigation facility was not available from  other perennial sources; and
d. Tractor owners, except in  genuine cases where there is loss of income and consequential impairment of  their repaying capacity.
Under this arrangement the  installments defaulted willfully in earlier years will not be eligible for  rescheduling. The banks may have to postpone payment of interest by borrowers.  While fixing extension of period the commitment towards interest may also be  taken into account.
31. In regard to category (ii)  i.e. where the borrower’s assets are totally damaged, the rescheduling by way  of extension of loan period may be determined on the basis of overall repaying  capacity of the borrower including his repayment commitment on the old term  loans and towards the conversion loan (medium term loan) on account of  postponing of repayment of short term loans and the fresh crop loan. In such  cases, the repayment period of total loan (including interest liability) less  the subsidies received from the Government agencies, compensation available  under the insurance schemes, etc. may be fixed having regard to the repaying  capacity of the borrower subject to a maximum of 15 years, depending upon the  type of investment as well as the economic (useful) life of the new asset  financed, except in cases where loan relates to land shaping, silt removal,  soil conservation, etc. Thus in the case of loans for agricultural machineries,  viz., pump sets and tractors, it should be ensured that the total loan period  does not generally exceed 9 years from the date of advance.
32. Apart from rescheduling  existing term loans, banks will provide to affected farmers diverse type of  term loans for developmental purposes, such as:
a. Minor Irrigation
: Term loans for repairs to wells, pump sets, etc.  which are to be quantified after assessing the extent of damage and estimated  cost of repairs.
b. Bullocks:
Where the draught animals have been washed away,  requests for fresh loans for a new pair of bullocks/he-buffaloes may be  considered. Where loans are given for purchase of new cattle or where farmers  have bought milch cattle, reasonable credit may be given for purchase of fodder  or feed.
c. Milch Cattle:
Term loan for milch cattle will be considered  depending upon breed, milk yield, etc; the loan amount will include repairs to  shelters, purchase of equipment and feed.
d. Insurance:
Considering the proneness of areas to cyclones and  other natural calamities, the cattle should be insured. Milch animals/ draught  cattle should be branded for identification as also to serve as safeguard  against their re-sale by the beneficiaries.
e. Poultry and Piggery
: For poultry, piggery and goatery, loans will be  considered as per the norms of different banks.
f. Fisheries:
In the case of borrowers who have lost their boats,  nets and other equipment, re-phasing of payment of existing dues may be allowed  on merits. Fresh loans may be granted to them with loan maturity of 3 - 4  years. Loans for repairs to boats of the existing borrowers may also be  considered. In cases where subsidy is available the quantum of loan should be  reduced to that extent. In States where substantial subsidy towards the cost of  boats, nets, etc. is likely to be available, proper coordination with the  concerned State Government Department in this regard must be ensured. Apart  from complying with other norms and conditions for grant of advances,  assistance may be sought from the Department of Fisheries, which may be  expected to take measures, which would enable banks to proceed with financing  for this purpose. The boats should be comprehensively insured against all risks  including natural calamities as far as possible.
33. It is likely that  financial assistance will be required for reclamation of land covered by sand  casting. Normally, sand/ silt deposits up to 3 inches will either be ploughed  back into the soil or removed by the farmers without any need for financial  assistance. Loan applications will, however, be considered in cases where  immediate cultivation is possible and reclamation (removal of sand) is  necessary. Wherever reclamation finance for saline lands is warranted, the cost  of reclamation not exceeding 25% of the scale allowed for crop loan may be  advanced along with the crop loan.
34. For other activities like  agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, betel vine growing etc., banks will  advance loans for investment and working capital under their existing schemes  and follow usual procedures laid down by them. The working capital finance may  be provided until such period the income from the plantation is adequate to  take care of such expenditure.
35. However, additional need  based crop loans if necessary would be given for revitalisation/ rejuvenation  of standing crops/ orchards based on individual assessment.
36. The question relating to  procurement and proper arrangement for supply of adequate quantity of seeds and  various types of fertilizers will have to be discussed with the State  Government and District Administration in each district. Similarly, for the  purpose of ensuring adequate irrigation facilities, the State Government will  undertake repairs to Government owned shallow and deep tube wells and River  Lift Irrigation System damaged by floods and other natural calamities. As for  fisheries, the fisheries department of the State Government will make  arrangement to obtain fingerlings and supply them to those who wish to revive  tank fishing with bank finance.
37. The State Government will  have to consider preparation of schemes, which would enable commercial banks to  obtain refinance at NABARD rates for amounts advanced by banks for the said  purpose.
C
.
Terms and Conditions
38. The terms and conditions  governing relief loans will be flexible as to guarantee, security, margin, etc.
a. Guarantee
Credit should not be denied  for want of personal guarantees.
b. Security
i. Where the bank’s existing  security has been eroded because of damage or destruction by floods, assistance  will not be denied merely for want of additional fresh security. The fresh loan  may be granted even if the value of security (existing as well as the asset to  be acquired from the new loan) is less than the loan amount. For fresh loans, a  sympathetic view will have to be taken.
ii. Where the crop loan (which  has been converted into term loan) was earlier given against personal security/  hypothecation of crop and the borrower is not able to offer charge/mortgage of  land as security for the converted loan, he should not be denied conversion  facility merely on the ground of his inability to furnish land as security. If  the borrower has already taken a term loan against mortgage/charge on land, the  bank should be content with a second charge for the converted term loan. Banks  should not insist on third party guarantees for providing conversion  facilities.
iii. In the case of term loans  for replacement of equipments, repairs, etc. and for working capital finance to  artisans and self-employed persons or for crop loans, usual security may be  obtained. Where land is taken as security, in the absence of original title  records, a certificate issued by the Revenue Department officials may be  accepted for financing farmers who have lost proof of their titles i.e. in the  form of deeds, as also the registration certificates issued to registered  share-croppers.
c. Margin
39. Margin requirements may be  waived or the grants/ subsidy given by the concerned State Government may be  considered as margin.
d. Rate of Interest
40. The rates of interest will  be in accordance with the directives of the Reserve Bank. Within the areas of  their discretion, however, banks are expected to take a sympathetic view of the  difficulties of the borrowers and extend a concessional treatment to  calamity-affected people.
Those meeting the eligibility  criteria under the Scheme of Differential Rate of Interest should be provided  credit in accordance with the provision of the Scheme.
In respect of current dues in  default, no penal interest will be charged. The banks should also suitably  defer the compounding of interest charges.
Banks may not levy any penal  interest and consider waiving penal interest, if any, already charged in regard  to the loans converted/rescheduled.
III. Artisans and  self-employed persons
41. For all categories of  rural artisans and self-employed persons including handloom weavers, loans will  be needed for repairs of sheds, replacement of implements, and purchase of raw  materials and stores. In sanctioning the loan, due allowance will be made for  subsidy/ assistance available from the State Government concerned.
42. There may be many  artisans, traders and self-employed persons who may not have any banking  arrangement or facility with any bank, but will now need financial assistance  for rehabilitation. Such categories will be eligible for assistance from banks’  branches in whose command areas they reside or carry on their profession/  business. Where such a person/ party falls under the command area of more than  one bank, the banks concerned will meet together and sort out his problem.
IV. Small Scale and Tiny  Units
43. Rehabilitation of units  under village and cottage industry sector, small-scale industrial units as also  smaller of the medium industrial sector damaged, will also need attention. Term  loans for repairs to and renovation of factory buildings/sheds and machinery as  also for replacement of damaged parts and working capital for purchase of raw  materials and stores will need to be provided urgently.
44. Where the raw materials or  finished goods have been washed away or ruined or damaged, banks’ security for  working capital will naturally be eroded and the working capital account (Cash  Credit or Loan) will be out of order. In such cases, banks will convert  drawings in excess of the value of security into a term loan and also provide  further working capital to the borrower.
45. Depending on the damage  suffered and time needed for rehabilitation and restarting production and  sales, term loan instalments will have to be suitably rescheduled, keeping in  view the income generating capacity of the unit. Shortfall in margins will have  to be condoned or even waived and borrower should be allowed time to build up  margin gradually from his future cash generation. Wherever State Government or  any agency has formulated special scheme for providing grants/ subsidy/ seed  money, suitable margin may be stipulated to the extent of such grants/ subsidy/  seed money.
46. The primary consideration  before the banks in extending credit to a small/tiny unit for its  rehabilitation should be the viability of the venture after the rehabilitation programme  is implemented.
V. Other Issues
a. Business Continuity Planning
47. In the backdrop of  increased leveraging of technology in banking system, Business Continuity  Planning (BCP) has become a key pre-requisite for minimizing business  disruption and system failures. As a Business Continuity Planning (BCP)  strategy, banks may identify alternate branches for branches located in areas  prone to natural calamities. As per the extant instructions, the Boards of  banks are required to approve a policy on BCP, allocate sufficient resources  and provide clear guidance and direction in this regard to the Top Management.  Banks may formulate full-fledged comprehensive BCP rather than having only  Disaster-Recovery (DR) arrangements. The banks may also focus on keeping the DR  site current, to test them comprehensively and synchronize the data between the  primary and secondary sites.
b. Access to customers to  their bank accounts
48. In areas where the bank  branches are affected by natural calamity and are unable to function normally,  banks may operate from temporary premises, under advice to RBI. For continuing  the temporary premises beyond 30 days, specific approval may be obtained from  the concerned regional office(RO) of RBI. Banks may also ensure rendering of  banking services to the affected areas by setting up satellite offices, extension  counters or mobile banking facilities under intimation to RO of RBI.
To satisfy customer’s  immediate cash requirements, banks could consider waiving the penalties related  to accessing accounts such as fixed deposits.
Restoration of the functioning  of ATMs at the earliest or making alternate arrangements for providing such  facilities may be given due importance. Banks may consider putting in place  arrangements for allowing their customers to access other ATM networks, Mobile  ATMs, etc.
c. Currency Management
49. If the bank’s currency  chest branch is affected, the bank may immediately contact the nearest  functioning currency chest branch of any bank which shall supply currency notes  to the affected currency chest, to enable them to supply cash to the bank  branches linked to them under intimation to the concerned RO of RBI. In case of  need, banks whose currency chests are affected, may, under intimation to the  concerned Regional Office of the Reserve Bank, open repositories for a  temporary period, with a view to meeting their day to day cash requirements.
d. KYC Norms
50. To facilitate opening of  new accounts by persons affected by natural calamities especially for availing  various reliefs given by Government/other agencies, banks may open accounts  with –
a. introduction from another  account holder who has undergone full KYC procedure, or
b. documents of identity such  as Voter’s Identity Card or a driving license, identity card issued by an  office, company, school, college, etc. along with a document indicating the  address such as Electricity Bill, Ration Card etc. or
c. introduction by two  neighbours who have the documents as indicated in para 50(b) above or
d. in the absence of the  above, any other evidence to the satisfaction of the bank.
The above instructions will be  applicable to cases where the balance in the account does not exceed Rs.  50,000/- or the amount of relief granted (if higher ) and the total credit in  the account does not exceed Rs. 1,00,000/- or the amount of relief granted, (if  higher) in a year.
e. Clearing and Settlement  Systems
51. To ensure continuity in  clearing service, RBI has advised the banks for ‘on-city back-up centres’ in 20  large cities and effective low-cost settlement solution for the remaining  cities. The banks in a clearing area could meet with a view to providing  flexible clearing services. However, notwithstanding these arrangements, banks  may also consider discounting cheques for higher amounts to meet customers’  requirement of funds where clearing facilities have been disrupted. Banks could  also consider waiver fees for EFT, ECS or mail services so as to facilitate  inward transfer of funds to accounts of persons affected by a natural calamity.
VI. Applicability of the  guidelines in the case of riots and disturbances
52. Whenever RBI advises the  banks to extend rehabilitation assistance to the riot/ disturbance affected  persons, the aforesaid guidelines may broadly be followed by banks for the  purpose. It should, however, be ensured that only genuine persons, duly  identified by the State Administration as having been affected by the riots/  disturbances, are provided assistance as per the guidelines.
The issuance of advice to the  banks by Reserve Bank of India  on receipt of request/ information from State Government and thereafter issue  of instructions by banks to their branches generally results in delay in  extending the assistance to riot-affected people. With a view to ensuring quick  relief to the affected persons, it has been decided that the District Collector,  on occurrence of the riots/ disturbances, may ask the Lead Bank Officer to  convene a meeting of the DCC, if necessary and submit a report to the DCC on  the extent of damage caused to life and property in the area affected by  riots/disturbances. If the DCC is satisfied that there has been extensive loss  to life and property on account of the riots/ disturbances, the relief as per  the above guidelines may be extended to the people affected by the riots/  disturbances. In certain cases, where there are no District Consultative  Committees, the District Collector may request the convener of the State Level  Bankers’ Committee of the State to convene a meeting of the bankers to consider  extension of relief to the affected persons. The report submitted by the  Collector and the decision thereon of DCC/ SLBC may be recorded and should form  a part of the minutes of the meeting. A copy of the proceedings of the meeting  may be forwarded to the concerned Regional Office of the Reserve Bank of India.
VII. Applicability of  the guidelines in the case of trade and industry
53. Instructions on  moratorium, maximum repayment period, additional collateral for restructured  loans and asset classification in respect of fresh finance will be applicable  to all affected restructured borrowal accounts, including accounts of  industries and trade, besides agriculture.
Appendix
Master Circular - Guidelines for Relief Measures by banks in  areas affected by
Natural Calamities
List of circulars consolidated  by the Master Circular
Sr. No.
Circular No.
Date
Subject
1.
RPCD .No. PS.BC.6/PS.126-84
2.8.84
Revised guidelines for relief measures by banks in areas    affected by natural calamities
2.
RPCD.No.PLFS.BC.38/PS.126-91/92
21.9.91
Banks’ assistance to persons affected by riots/ communal    disturbances, etc.
3.
RPCD.No.PLFS.BC.59/05.04.02/92-93
6.1.93
Guidelines for Relief Measures by    banks in areas affected by natural calamities-(Consumption Loans)
4.
RPCD.No.PLFS.BC.128/05.04.02/97-98
20.6.98
Relief measures to persons    affected by natural calamities –Agricultural advances
5
RPCD.PLFS. BC.    No.42/05.02.02/2005-06
1.10. 2005
The Advisory Committee on Flow of    credit to Agriculture and related activities from the Banking System