(119 kb)
Master Circular on SHG-Bank Linkage Programme
RBI/2014-15/61
RPCD.FID.BC.No.06/12.01.033/2014-15
July 01, 2014
The Chairman / Managing Director /
Chief Executive Officer
All  Scheduled Commercial Banks
Dear  Sir,
Master Circular on SHG-Bank Linkage Programme
The  Reserve Bank of India has, from time to time, issued a number of  guidelines/instructions to banks on SHG-Bank Linkage Programme. In order to  enable the banks to have instructions at one place, a Master Circular  incorporating the existing
guidelines/instructions
on the subject has been  updated and enclosed. This Master Circular consolidates and updates the  circulars issued by Reserve Bank on the subject up to June 30, 2014 as  indicated in the
Appendix
.
Yours  faithfully
(A.  Udgata)
Principal  Chief General Manager
Encl:  As above
Master Circular on SHG-Bank Linkage Programme
1. Despite  the vast expansion of the formal credit system in the country, the dependence  of the rural poor on moneylenders somehow continued in many areas, especially  for meeting emergent requirements. Such dependence was pronounced in the case  of marginal farmers, landless labourers, petty traders and rural artisans  belonging to socially and economically backward classes and tribes whose  propensity to save is limited or too small to be mopped up by the banks. For  various reasons, credit to these sections of the population had not been  institutionalized. The studies conducted by NABARD, APRACA and ILO on the  informal groups promoted by Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) brought out  that Self-Help Savings and Credit Groups had the potential to bring together the formal  banking structure and the rural poor for mutual benefit and that their working had  been encouraging.
2. Accordingly, NABARD launched a pilot project to cover Self-Help Groups (SHGs) promoted by  Non-Governmental Organizations, banks and other agencies under the pilot  project and supported it by way of  refinance. The quick studies conducted by NABARD in a few states to assess the  impact of the linkage project brought out encouraging and positive features like  increase in loan volume of the SHGs, definite shift in the loaning pattern of  the members from non-income generating activities to production activities,  nearly 100% recovery performance, significant reduction in the transaction  costs for both the banks and the borrowers etc, besides leading to gradual  increase in the income level of the SHG members. Another significant feature  observed in the linkage project was that about 85% of the groups linked with  the banks were formed exclusively by women.
3. With a  view to studying the functioning of SHGs and NGOs for expanding their  activities and deepening their role in the rural sector, in November 1994, RBI  constituted a working Group comprising eminent NGO functionaries, academicians,  consultants and bankers under the Chairmanship of Shri S.K. Kalia, the then  Managing Director, NABARD. The Working Group was of the view that the linking  of SHGs with the banks is a cost effective, transparent and flexible approach  to improve the accessibility of credit from the formal banking system to the  unreached rural poor, which is expected to offer the much needed solution to  the twin problems being faced by the banks, viz recovery of loans in the rural  areas and the high transaction cost in dealing with small borrowers at frequent  intervals. The Group, therefore, felt that the thrust of the policy should be  to encourage the formation of SHGs and their linking with the banks and in this  regard, the banks have a major role to play. The Working Group had recommended  that the banks should treat the linkage programme as a business opportunity and  they may design area specific and group specific loan packages taking into  account inter alia the potential, local needs, available talent/skills etc.
4. The  Reserve Bank constituted four informal groups in October 2002 to examine  various issues concerning micro-finance delivery. Linking of SHGs with banks  have been emphasized in the Monetary policy of Reserve Bank of India and Union Budget  announcements from time to time and various  guidelines have been issued to banks in this regard. To scale up the SHGs  linkage programme and make it sustainable, banks were advised that they may  consider lending to SHGs as part of their mainstream credit operations both at  policy and implementation level. They may include SHG linkage in their  corporate strategy/plan, training curriculum of their officers and staff and  implement it as a regular business activity and monitor and review it  periodically.
5. Separate Segment under priority sector:
In order to enable the  banks to report their SHG lending without difficulty, it was decided that the  banks should report their lending to SHGs and/or to NGOs for on-lending to  SHGs/members of SHGs under the new segment, viz. 'Advances to SHGs'  irrespective of the purposes for which the members of SHGs have been disbursed  loans. Lending to SHGs should be included by the banks as part of their lending  to the weaker sections.
6. Opening of Savings Bank A/c:
The SHGs registered or  unregistered which are engaged in promoting savings habits among their members  would be eligible to open savings bank accounts with banks. These SHGs need not  necessarily have already availed of credit facilities from banks before opening  savings bank accounts. KYC verification of all the members of SHG need not be  done while opening the savings bank account of the SHG as KYC verification of  all the office bearers would suffice. Further, it is clarified that since KYC  would have already been verified while opening the savings bank account and the  account continues to be in operation and is being used for credit linkage, no  separate KYC verification of the members or office bearers is necessary at the  time of credit linking of SHGs,
7. SHG lending to be a part of planning process:
Bank lending to SHGs should  be included in branch credit plan, block credit plan, district credit plan and  state credit plan of each bank. While no target is being prescribed under SHG  bank linkage programme, utmost priority should be accorded to the sector in  preparation of these plans. It should also form an integral part of the bank’s  corporate credit plan.
8. Margin and Security Norms:
As per operational guidelines of NABARD, SHGs may  be sanctioned savings linked loans by banks (varying from a saving to loan  ratio of 1:1 to 1:4). However, in case of matured SHGs, loans may be  given beyond the limit of four times the savings as per the discretion of the  bank. Experience showed that group dynamics and peer pressure brought in excellent  recovery from members of the SHGS. The flexibility allowed to the banks in  respect of margin, security norms, etc. under the pilot project continues to be  operational under the linkage programme even beyond the pilot phase.
9. Documentation:
A simple system requiring minimum procedures and  documentation is a precondition for augmenting flow of credit to SHGs. Keeping  in view the nature of lending and status of borrowers, banks should strive to  remove all operational irritants and make arrangements to expeditiously  sanction and disburse credit by delegating adequate sanctioning powers to  branch managers. The loan application forms, procedures and documents should be  made simple. It would help in providing prompt and hassle-free credit.
10. Presence of  defaulters in SHGs:
The defaults by a few members of SHGs and/or their family  members to the financing bank should not ordinarily come in the way of  financing SHGs per se by banks provided the SHG is not in default to it.  However, the bank loan may not be utilized by the SHG for financing a defaulter  member to the bank.
11. Capacity Building and Training:
An important step in the  Linkage Programme would be the training of the field level officials and  sensitization of the controlling and other senior officials of the bank.  Considering the need and magnitude of training requirements of bank  officers/staff both at field level and controlling office level, the banks may  initiate suitable steps to internalize the SHGs linkage project and organize  exclusive short duration programmes for the field level functionaries. In  addition, suitable awareness/sensitization programmes may be conducted for  their middle level controlling officers as well as senior officers.
12. Monitoring and Review of SHG Lending:
Having regard to the potential  of the SHGs, banks may have to closely monitor the progress regularly at  various levels. In order to give a boost to the ongoing SHG bank linkage  programme for credit flow to the unorganized sector, banks were advised in  January 2004 that monitoring of SHG bank linkage programme may be made a  regular item on the agenda for discussion at the SLBC and DCC meetings. It should be reviewed at the highest  corporate level on a quarterly basis. Further the progress of the programme may  be reviewed by the banks at regular intervals. A progress report may be sent to  NABARD (Micro Credit Innovations Department), Mumbai, on a half-yearly basis,  as on 30 September and 31 March each year so as to reach within 30 days of the  half-year to which the report relates.
13. Encourage  SHG Linkage:
Banks  should provide adequate incentives to their branches in financing the Self Help  Groups (SHGs) and establish linkages with them, making the procedures  absolutely simple and easy while providing for total flexibility in such  procedures to suit local conditions. The  group dynamics of working of the SHGs may be left to themselves and need neither be regulated nor formal structures imposed  or insisted upon. The  approach to financing of SHGs should be totally hassle-free and may include  consumption expenditures.
14. Interest rates:
The interest rate applicable to loans given by  banks to Self Help Groups/member beneficiaries would be left to their  discretion.
15. Total Financial Inclusion and Credit Requirement of SHGs:
Banks  have been advised to meet the entire credit requirements of SHG members, as  envisaged in the Paragraph 93 of the Union Budget announcement made by the  Honourable Finance Minister for the year 2008-09 where in it was stated as under:  "Banks will be encouraged to  embrace the concept of Total Financial Inclusion. Government will request all  scheduled commercial banks to follow the example set by some public sector  banks and meet the entire credit requirements of SHG members, namely, (a)  income generation activities, (b) social needs like housing, education,  marriage, etc. and (c) debt swapping".
Appendix
List  of Circulars consolidated in the Master Circular
Sr.    No.
Circular    No.
Date
Subject
1.
RPCD.No.Plan.BC.13/PL-09.22/91/92
July    24,1991
Improving Access of Rural poor to Banking-    Role of Intervening Agencies- Self Help Groups
2.
RPCD.No.PL.BC.120/04.09.22/95-96
April    2,1996
Linking of Self Help Groups with banks-    Working Group on NGOs and SHGs- recommendations – Follow up
3.
DBOD.DIR.BC.11/13.01.08/98
February 10,1998
Opening of Savings bank accounts in the    name of Self Help Groups(SHGs)
4.
RPCD.PI.BC/12/04.09.22/98-99
July    24,1998
Linking of Self Help Groups with Banks
5.
RPCD.No.PLAN.BC.94/04.09.01/98-99
April 24,1999
Loans to Micro Credit Organizations- Rates    of Interest
6.
RPCD.PL.BC.28/04.09.22/99-2000
September    30,1999
Credit delivery through Micro Credit    Organizations / Self Help Groups
7.
RPCD.No.PL.BC.62/04.09.01/99-2000
February    18,2000
Micro credit
8.
RPCD.No.Plan.BC.42/04.09.22/    2003-04
November    03,2003
Micro Finance
9.
RPCD    No.Plan.BC.61/04.09.22/2003-04
January    09,2004
Credit flow to the unorganized sector
10.
RBI/385/2004-05,    RPCD.No.Plan.BC.84/04.09.22/2004-05
March 03,2005
Submitting progress report under micro    credit
11.
RBI/2006-07/441    RPCD.CO.MFFI.BC.No.103/12.01.01/2006-07
June 20,2007
Microfinance-Submission of progress reports
12.
RPCD.MFFI.BC.No.56/12.01.001/2007-08
April    15,2008
Total Financial inclusion and Credit    Requirement of SHGs.
13.
DBOD.AML.BC.No.87/14.01.001/2012-13
March    28, 2013
Know Your Customer Norms / Anti Money    Laundering Standards / Combating of Financing of Terrorism / Obligation of banks    under Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 – Simplifying norms for Self    Help Groups