(1122 kb)
Master Circular – Operational Guidelines to Primary Dealers
RBI/2014-15/96
IDMD.PDRD.01/03.64.00/2014-15
July 1, 2014
All Primary Dealers
Dear Sir / Madam
Master Circular – Operational Guidelines to  Primary Dealers
The Reserve Bank of India has, from time to  time, issued a number of guidelines/instructions to the Primary Dealers (PDs) in  regard to their operations. The
Master Circular
incorporating the  guidelines/instructions/circulars on the subject issued up to June 30, 2014 is  enclosed. A list of circulars finding reference in this master circular is  enclosed as Annex-XII.
2. The guidelines on Capital Adequacy Standards and Risk  Management for the standalone PDs are being issued vide our
Master  Circular IDMD.PDRD.02/03.64.00/2014-15 dated July 1, 2014
. The banks  undertaking PD activities departmentally should follow the extant guidelines  applicable to the banks regarding their capital adequacy requirement and risk  management. This  Master Circular has also been placed on RBI website at
www.rbi.org.in
.
Yours faithfully
(Rekha Warriar)
Chief General Manager
Encl: As above
Table of Contents
Section I:    Regulations governing Primary Dealers
Sl.No.
Details
1
Primary Dealer (PD)    System
2
Primary Market Activities
3
Secondary Market Activities
4
Sources of funds
5
Application of funds
6
Norms for Ready Forward transactions
7
Portfolio Management Services by PDs
8
Guidelines on Interest Rate Derivatives
9
Guidelines on Credit Default Swaps
10
Investment Guidelines
11
Prudential Systems/Controls
12
Trading of Government Securities on Stock    Exchanges
13
Business through brokers
14
Guidelines on declaration of dividend
15
Guidelines on Corporate Governance
16
Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 –    Obligations of NBFCs
17
Violation/Circumvention of Instructions
18
Disclosure of Penal Actions
19
Exit/Termination Procedure
Section II: Additional Guidelines applicable    to banks undertaking PD business departmentally
1
Introduction
2
Procedure for Authorization of bank-PDs
3
Applicability of Guidelines issued for bank-PDs
4
Maintenance of books and accounts
5
Capital Adequacy and Risk Management
6
Supervision by RBI
Annexes
I
Format of Undertaking
II-A
Statements / Returns required to be submitted by PDs to IDMD
II-B
Statements / Returns required to be submitted by PDs to other than    IDMD
II- C
Statements / Returns required to be submitted by banks on their PD    business to IDMD
III
Illustration showing    the underwriting scheme
IV
Illustration showing    PDs’ commitment to T-Bills/CMBs auctions and success ratio
V
Format PDR–I Return
VI
Format PDR-II Return
VII
Format PDR-IV Return *
VIII
Publication of    Financial Results
IX
Monthly Return on Interest    Rate Risk of Rupee Derivatives
X
Reporting format for    PDs declaring dividend
XI
List of circulars consolidated
XII
List of circulars referred
*    PDR-III return is given as Annex to our Master Circular on Capital Adequacy    Standards and Risk Management Guidelines for standalone Primary Dealers
Section I –  Regulations governing Primary Dealers
1. Primary  Dealer System
1.1 Introduction
In 1995, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) introduced  the system of Primary Dealers (PDs) in the Government Securities (G-Sec)  Market. The objectives of the PD system are  to strengthen the infrastructure in G-Sec market, development of underwriting and  market making capabilities for G-Sec outside the RBI, improve secondary market  trading system and to make PDs an effective conduit for open market operations  (OMO). As on June 30, 2014, there are seven  standalone PDs and thirteen banks authorized to undertake PD business  departmentally.
1.2 Eligibility conditions
1.2.1 The  eligibility criteria for an entity to apply to the Reserve Bank of India for  undertaking the activities of a PD are as under:
Eligible    Institutions
Eligibility conditions
a. Subsidiary         of scheduled commercial bank/s and All India Financial Institutions
b. Subsidiaries/ joint ventures set up         in India by entities incorporated abroad.
c. Company incorporated under the         Companies Act, 1956 and does not fall under (a) or (b).
• Should be registered as an NBFC under Section 45-IA of the RBI Act,    1934 for
at least one year
prior to the submission of application.
•  Should have minimum net owned funds (NOF)
1
of Rs.150 crore for undertaking core activities and Rs.250 crore for    undertaking diversified activities (as defined in para 5). Before commencing    PD business, applicant entity has to submit an external auditor’s certificate    to this effect.
• Should have exposure in the securities business and in particular to    the G-Sec market for at least one year prior to the submission of    application. Exposure for this purpose would be as under:
i. Applicant’s turnover in the G-Sec business during the year preceding    the year of application for PD authorisation should be at least equal to 15    per cent of its total turnover.
ii. It’s assets in G-Sec during the year preceding the year of application    should be at least equal to 15 per cent of its total assets.
• Applicant entity should submit an annual target along with plan of    action for turnover to be achieved on behalf of mid-segment (Provident Funds,    Urban Cooperative banks, Regional Rural banks, Trusts, etc.) and retail    (individual) investors at the time of submission of their application for PD    authorisation. The annual minimum target will be same as applicable to    existing PDs from time to time as mentioned in para 1.2.6 of this circular. Previous    experience in servicing retail and mid- segment customers in G-Sec will be    viewed favourably while processing the application for PD authorisation.
• In case of subsidiaries/joint ventures set up by entities incorporated    abroad, in addition to conditions given above, the following may be adhered    to:
i. The applicant should have approval of Foreign Investment Promotion    Board.
ii. The parent foreign company directly or through its subsidiaries should    have been in PD business for three years or more in active markets.
iii. Such entity should suitably ring fence its system from its parent and    associates
Banks    which do not have a partly or wholly owned subsidiary undertaking PD business    and intending to undertake PD business departmentally
• Minimum net owned funds (NOF) of Rs. 1,000 crore.
• Minimum Capital to Risk Weighted Assets Ratio (CRAR) of 9 per cent.
• Net non-performing assets of less than 3 per cent and a profit making    record for last three years.
• The applicant bank should have approval of Department of Banking    Operations and Development, Central Office, Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai.
• Applicant bank should submit an annual target along with plan of    action for turnover to be achieved on behalf of mid-segment and retail    investors at the time of submission of their application for PD    authorisation. The annual minimum target will be same as applicable to    existing PDs from time to time as mentioned in para 1.2.6 of this circular. Previous    experience in servicing mid-segment and retail customers in G-Sec will be    viewed favourably while processing the application for PD authorisation.
1.2.2 An  applicant will not be eligible for authorisation as a PD if, within the last one year, it has been subject to litigation or  regulatory action or investigation that the Reserve Bank considers material or  otherwise relevant to the business of PD. In making such determination, RBI may  consult with the appropriate regulators for their views.
1.2.3 An entity  satisfying the criteria stipulated above should submit its application to the  Chief General Manager, Internal Debt Management Department (IDMD), RBI, Mumbai.  The RBI will, if satisfied, grant ‘in principle approval’. The applicant will, thereafter, submit an  undertaking in respect of the terms and conditions agreed to as per the  prescribed format given in Annex I. Based on the application and undertaking,  an authorisation letter will be issued by  RBI. Continuation as a PD would depend  on its compliance with the terms and conditions of authorisation.
1.2.4 The  decision to authorise PDs will be taken by RBI based on its perception of  market needs, suitability of the applicant and the likely value addition to the  system.
1.2.5 The  applicant entity may also have to adhere to other terms and conditions, as may  be specified by RBI from time-to-time.
1.2.6 Existing  PDs should submit an annual target (in consultation with RBI) along with plan  of action for turnover to be achieved on behalf of mid-segment and retail investors  in the month of June every year. The annual target for July 2014-June 2015 should  not be less than 150 per cent of minimum NOF for standalone PDs and 100 per  cent of minimum NOF for bank PDs. The target will be reviewed annually.
1.2.7 PDs are
not
permitted to set up  step-down subsidiaries.
1.3 Role and obligations of the PDs
PDs are  expected to play an active role in the G-Sec market, both in its primary and  secondary market segments through various obligations like participating in  Primary auction, market making in G-Sec, predominance of investment in G-Sec, achieving  minimum secondary market turnover ratio, maintaining efficient internal control  system for fair conduct of business etc. A PD is required to have a standing  arrangement with RBI based on the execution of an undertaking (
Annex I
) and the authorization letter  issued by RBI every three years. Undertaking will be based on passing of a  fresh Board resolution by the PD every three years.
1.4 Facilities from RBI
The RBI currently extends the following facilities to the PDs  to enable them to fulfill their obligations effectively:
access to  Current Account facility with RBI;
access to  Subsidiary General Ledger (SGL) Account facility with RBI;
access to  e-Kuber facility for primary auction;
permission  to borrow and lend in the money market including call money market and to trade  in all money market instruments;
memberships  of electronic dealing, trading and settlement systems (NDS  platforms/INFINET/RTGS/CCIL);
access to the  Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) of RBI;
access to  liquidity support from RBI under a scheme separately notified for standalone PDs;  and
access to OMO by RBI.
The  facilities are subject to review.
1.5 Regulation and Supervision  by RBI
Operations  of the PDs are subject to prudential and regulatory guidelines issued by RBI from time to time.
1.5.1 Returns:
As part of off-site supervision, PDs are required to submit  prescribed periodic returns to RBI as per
Annex  II–A & B
. RBI may also prescribe any other return as it may deem  necessary.
1.5.2 On-Site Supervision:
RBI  will have the right to inspect the books, records, documents and accounts of a  PD. PDs are required to make available all such documents, records, etc. to the  RBI officers and render all necessary assistance as and when required.
1.5.3 Any change in the shareholding  pattern / capital structure of a PD needs prior approval of RBI. PDs should  report any other material changes such as business profile, organization, etc.  affecting the conditions of licensing as PD to RBI immediately.
1.5.4 In addition, PDs are required to  meet registration and such other requirements as stipulated by the Securities  and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) including operations on the Stock Exchanges,  if they undertake any activity regulated by SEBI.
1.5.5 A PD should bring to the  attention of RBI any major complaint against it or action initiated/taken  against it by authorities such as the Stock Exchanges, SEBI, CBI, Enforcement  Directorate, Income Tax Department, etc.
1.5.6 PDs are expected to join Primary  Dealers Association of India (PDAI) and Fixed Income Money Market and  Derivatives Association (FIMMDA) and abide by the code of conduct framed by  them and such other actions as initiated by them in the interest of the securities  markets.
2.
Primary Market Activities
PDs are  expected to support the primary issues of dated securities of Central  Government and State Government, T-Bills and CMBs through underwriting/bidding  commitments. The related guidelines are as under:
2.1 Underwriting of Dated G-Sec
2.1.1 Dated securities of Central Government
The underwriting commitment on dated securities of  Central Government will be divided into two parts - a) Minimum Underwriting  Commitment (MUC), and b) Additional Competitive Underwriting (ACU).
The MUC of each PD will be computed to ensure that at  least 50 percent of the notified amount of each issue is mandatorily  underwritten equally by all the PDs. The share under MUC will be uniform for  all PDs, irrespective of their capital or balance sheet size. The remaining  portion of the notified amount will be underwritten through an ACU auction.
RBI will announce the MUC of each PD. In the ACU auction, each PD would be required  to bid for an amount
at least
equal to its share of MUC. A PD cannot bid  for more than 30 per cent of the notified amount in the ACU auction.
The auction could be either uniform price-based or  multiple price-based depending upon the market conditions and other relevant  factors, which will be announced before the underwriting auction for each  issue.
Bids will be tendered by the PDs within the  stipulated time, indicating both the amount of the underwriting commitment and  underwriting commission rates. A PD can  submit multiple bids for underwriting. Depending upon the bids submitted for  underwriting, RBI will decide the cut-off rate of commission and inform the  PDs.
Underwriting commission:
All successful bidders in the ACU auction will be  paid underwriting commission on the ACU segment as per the auction rules
.
Those PDs who succeed in the ACU for 4 per cent and  above of the notified amount of the issue, will be paid commission on the MUC  at the weighted average of all the accepted bids in  the ACU. Others will get commission on the MUC at the weighted average rate of  the three lowest accepted bids in the ACU.
In the GOI securities auction, a PD should bid for an  amount not less than its total underwriting obligation. If two or more issues  are floated on the same day, the minimum bid amount will be applied to each  issue separately.
Underwriting  commission will be paid on the amount accepted for underwriting by the RBI,  irrespective of the actual amount of devolvement, by credit to the current  account of the respective PDs at the RBI, Fort, Mumbai, on the date of issue of  security.
In case of devolvement, PDs would be allowed to  set-off the accepted bids in the auction against their shortfall in  underwriting commitment accepted by the RBI. Devolvement of securities, if any,  on PDs will take place on pro-rata basis, depending upon the amount of  underwriting obligation of each PD after setting off the successful bids in the  auction.
RBI reserves the right to  accept any amount of underwriting up to 100 per cent of the notified amount or  even reject all the bids tendered by PDs for underwriting, without assigning  any reason.
An illustration on  underwriting procedure is given in Annex III.
2.1.2 Dated securities of State Governments
On announcement of an  auction of State Development Loans (SDLs), which are dated securities of the  State Governments, RBI may invite PDs to collectively bid to underwrite up to  100 per cent of the notified amount.
The  auction could be either uniform price-based or multiple price-based depending  upon the market conditions and other relevant factors, which will be announced  before the underwriting auction for each issue.
A PD can bid to underwrite  up to 30 per cent of the notified amount of the issue. If two or more issues are floated on the same  day, the limit of 30% is applied by taking the notified amounts separately.
Bids will be tendered by  PDs within the stipulated time, indicating both the amount of the underwriting  commitments and underwriting commission rates.  A PD can submit multiple bids for underwriting.
Depending upon the bids  submitted for underwriting, the RBI will decide the cut-off rate of commission  and the underwriting amount up to which bids would be accepted and inform the  PDs.
RBI reserves the right to  accept any amount of underwriting up to 100 per cent of the notified amount or  even reject all the bids tendered by PDs for underwriting, without assigning  any reason.
In case of devolvement, PDs would be allowed to  set-off the accepted bids in the auction against their shortfall in  underwriting commitment accepted by the RBI. Devolvement of securities, if any,  on PDs will take place on pro-rata basis, depending upon the amount of  underwriting obligation of each PD after setting off the successful bids in the  auction.
Underwriting commission  will be paid on the amount accepted for underwriting by the RBI, irrespective  of the actual amount of devolvement, by credit to the current account of the  respective PDs at the RBI, Fort, Mumbai, on the date of issue of security.
2.2 Bidding in Primary auctions of T-Bills/CMBs
Each PD will individually commit, at the beginning of the year (April –  March), to submit bids for a fixed percentage of the notified amount of  T-Bills/CMBs in each auction.
The minimum bidding commitment amount / percentage for each PD will be  determined by the RBI, in consultation with the PD. While  finalizing the bidding commitments, the RBI will take into account the NOF, the  offer made by the PD, its track record and its past adherence to the prescribed  success ratio. The amount/percentage of  minimum bidding commitment so determined by the RBI will remain unchanged for  the entire year or till execution of the undertaking for the next year.
In any auction of T-Bills/CMBs, if a PD fails  to submit the required minimum bid or submits a bid lower than its commitment,  the RBI may take appropriate penal action against the PD.
A PD would be required to achieve a minimum  success ratio of 40 percent of bidding commitment in T-Bills/CMBs auctions which will be monitored on a half yearly basis, i.e. April to September and  October to March, separately (For illustrations please refer to
Annex IV
).
The CMB  transactions may be reported in PDR returns along with the T-Bill transactions.
2.3 ‘When-Issued’ transactions in Central  G-Sec
PDs shall adhere to the guidelines issued by the  RBI vide
circular  IDMD.No. 2130/11.01.01 (D)  /2006-07 dated November 16, 2006
, as amended from time to time, for  undertaking “When Issued” transactions.
2.4  Submission of client bids in the primary auctions
The PDs  are allowed to submit bids of their SGL/Gilt account holders in the primary  auctions as their own bids under competitive route after putting in place the  following safeguards:
PDs should have a Board approved policy including  appropriate risk management system to take care of risks arising out of such  activity
List of clients, details of business done through  such clients and appropriateness of risk management system put in place may be  periodically reviewed by the Board.
Records maintained in this regard should be  subjected to concurrent audit.
PDs may  execute the secondary market sale transaction and report the same on NDS-OM (T+1  settlement). With respect to the dated securities, the sale transaction may be  made within one hour of intimation of firm allotment in the primary auctions.
2.5  Submission of non-competitive bids
PDs shall  adhere to the guidelines issued vide
circular  RBI/2008-09/479 - IDMD.No.5877/ 08.02.33/2008-09 dated May 22, 2009
, as  amended from time to time, in respect of submission of non-competitive bids in  the auctions of the G-Sec.
2.6 Sale of securities allotted in primary  issues on the same day
PDs shall  adhere to the guidelines issued vide circulars
IDMC.PDRS.No.PDS.1/03.64.00/  2000-01 dated October 6, 2000
,
RBI/2005/461–IDMD.PDRS.4777/10.02.01/2004-05  dated May 11, 2005
and
RBI/2012-13/133-IDMD.PDRD.188/03.64.00/2012-13  dated July 16, 2012
for undertaking sale of securities allotted in primary  issues on the same day. PDs can avail services of brokers for carrying out such  sale contracts.
2.7  Settlement of primary auctions
The primary auction settlement is independent from  the secondary market settlements and therefore has to be funded separately.  Successful PDs shall provide sufficient funds in their current account with the  RBI on the auction settlement days before 3:00 pm to meet their obligations  against the subscriptions in the primary auctions failing which the shortage will be treated as an instance of ‘SGL bouncing’  and will be subjected to the applicable penal provisions.
3.
Secondary Market activities
3.1 Market  making in G-Sec:
PDs should offer two-way prices in G-Sec through  the Negotiated Dealing System-Order Matching (NDS-OM), over-the-counter (OTC)  market and recognized Stock Exchanges in India and take principal positions in  the secondary market for G-Sec.
3.2 Turnover  ratio:
A PD should annually achieve a minimum turnover ratio of 5 times for  Government dated securities and 10 times for T-Bills/CMBs of the average  month-end stocks. The turnover ratio in respect of outright transactions should  not be less than 3 times in Government dated securities and 6 times in  T-Bills/CMBs (Turnover ratio is the ratio of total purchase and sales during  the year in the secondary market to average month-end stocks).
3.3 Secondary Market Transactions -  Short-selling
PDs shall  adhere to the guidelines issued by the RBI vide
circular  RBI/2006-07/243 - IDMD.No./11.01.01(B)/2006-07 dated January 31, 2007
, on  “Short Sale in Central Government dated Securities”, and
RBI/2011-12/615  IDMD.PCD.No.21/14.03.07/2011-12 dated June 21, 2012
on “Secondary market transactions in  Government Securities - Short Selling
”
as amended from time to  time.
3.4
Separate  Trading of Registered Interest and Principal of Securities (STRIPS) in G-Sec
PDs shall adhere to the guidelines issued by the  RBI vide
circular  RBI/2009-10/360-IDMD.DOD.No.7/11.01.09/2009-10  dated March 25, 2010
, on STRIPS in G-Sec, as amended from time to time.
4.
Sources  of funds
4.1 PDs are permitted to borrow funds  from call/notice/term money market, repo (including CBLO) market, Inter-Corporate  Deposits, FCNR (B) loans, Commercial Paper and Non-Convertible Debentures. They  are also eligible for liquidity support from RBI.
4.2  Call/Notice Market
4.2.1 PDs are  allowed to borrow from call/notice market, on an average in a ‘reporting  fortnight’, up to 225 percent of their NOF as at the end March of the preceding  financial year. They may lend up to  25 percent of their NOF in call/notice money market, on an average in a ‘reporting  fortnight’. These limits on borrowing and lending are subject to periodic  review by RBI. PDs are governed by the provisions of the RBI
Master  Circular IDMD.PCD.  03/14.01.01/2013-14 dated July 1, 2014
on “Call/Notice  Money Market Operations”,
4.3 Inter-Corporate Deposits (ICDs)
4.3.1 ICDs may be raised  by PDs as per their funding needs. The PDs should put in place a Board approved  policy for ICDs which takes due consideration of the associated risks and  should include the following general principles:
The ICD borrowings  should in no case exceed 150 per cent of the NOF as at the end of March of the  preceding financial year.
ICDs accepted by PD  should be for a minimum period of one week.
ICDs accepted from  parent/promoter/group companies or any other related party should be on ‘arm’s  length basis’ and disclosed in financial statements as "related party  transactions".
Funds raised through  ICDs are subject to ALM discipline.
4.3.2 PDs are
prohibited
from placing funds in ICD market.
4.4 FCNR (B) loans / External Commercial  Borrowing
4.4.1 PDs may  avail of FCNR(B) loans up to a maximum of 25% of the NOF as at the end of March  of the preceding financial year and subject to the foreign exchange risk of  such loans being hedged at all times at least to the extent of 50 per cent of  the exposure.
PDs are governed by  the provisions of the RBI
Circular IDMC.PDRS.No. 3820/03.64.00/2002-03 dated March 24, 2003
, as amended from time to time, on “Availment of FCNR (B) Loans by Primary  Dealers (PDs)”.
4.4.2 PDs are
not
permitted to raise funds through External Commercial Borrowings.
4.5 Non-Convertible  Debentures (NCDs):
PDs may issue NCDs  of maturity up to one year, without the requirement of having a working capital  limit with a bank. They are governed by the directions, “Issuance of  Non-Convertible Debentures (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2010”, issued vide
circular  RBI/2009-10/505-IDMD.DOD.10/11.01.01(A)/2009-10 dated June 23, 2010
, as  amended from time to time.
4.6 Commercial Paper
Issuance of  Commercial Paper by PDs will be guided by RBI
Master  Circular IDMD.PCD. 04/14.01.02/2013-14 dated July  1, 2014
on “Guidelines for Issue of  Commercial Paper”.
4.7 Liquidity Support from RBI
In  addition to access to the RBI's LAF, standalone PDs are also provided with  liquidity support by the RBI against eligible G-Sec including SDLs. The  parameters based on which liquidity support will be allocated are given below:
Of the  total liquidity support, half of the amount will be divided equally among all  the standalone PDs. The remaining half (i.e. 50%) will be divided in the ratio  of 1:1 based on market performance in primary market and secondary market.  Performance in primary market will be computed on the basis of bids accepted in  the T-Bill/CMB auctions and G-Sec auctions in the proportionate weights of 1  and 3. Similarly, the secondary market performance will be judged on the basis  of outright turnover in T-Bills/CMBs and G-Sec in the proportionate weights of  1 and 3.
The  PD-wise limit of liquidity support will be revised every half-year  (April-September and October-March) based on the market performance of the PDs  in the preceding six months.
The  liquidity support will be made available at the ‘Repo Rate’ announced by the  RBI.
The  liquidity support availed by a PD will be repayable within a period of 90 days.  If it is repaid after 90 days, the penal rate of interest payable by PDs is  Bank rate plus 5 percentage points for the period beyond 90 days.
5.
Application of Funds
5.1 PDs are permitted to undertake a set of core  and non-core activities. PDs which  undertake only the core activities are required to maintain a minimum NOF of Rs.150 crore. PDs which also undertake non-core activities are  required to maintain a minimum NOF of Rs.250 crore.
5.2 The investment in G-Sec should have  predominance over the non-core activities in terms of investment pattern. Standalone  PDs are required to ensure predominance by maintaining at least 50 per cent of  their total financial investments (both long term and short term) in G-Sec at  any point of time. Investment in G-Sec will include  the PD’s Own Stock, Stock with RBI under Liquidity Support / Intra-day  Liquidity (IDL)/ LAF, Stock with market for repo borrowings and G-Sec pledged  with the CCIL.
5.3 Further, a PD’s investment in G-Sec (including T-Bills  and CMBs) and Corporate Bond (to the extent of 50% of NOF) on a daily basis  should be at least equal to its net call/notice/repo (including CBLO) borrowing  plus net RBI borrowing (through LAF/ Intra-Day Liquidity/ Liquidity Support)  plus the minimum prescribed NOF.
5.4 The following are  permitted under core activities:
Dealing  and underwriting in G-Sec,
Dealing in  Interest Rate Derivatives,
Providing  broking services in G-Sec,
Dealing  and underwriting in Corporate / PSU / FI bonds/ debentures,
Lending in  Call/ Notice/ Term/ Repo/ CBLO market,
Investment  in Commercial Papers (CPs),
Investment in Certificates of Deposit (CDs),
Investment  in Security Receipts issued by Securitization Companies/ Reconstruction  Companies, Asset Backed Securities (ABS), Mortgage Backed Securities (MBS),
Investment  in debt mutual funds where entire corpus is invested in debt securities,
Investments  in NCDs, and
Dealing in Credit Default Swaps.
5.5 PDs  are permitted to undertake the  following non-core activities:
5.5.1 Activities which are expected to  consume capital such as:
Investment  / trading in equity and equity derivatives market,
Investment  in units of equity oriented mutual funds, and
Underwriting  public issues of equity.
5.5.2 Services which may not require  significant capital outlay such as:
Professional  Clearing Services,
Portfolio  Management Services,
Issue  Management Services,
Merger  & Acquisition Advisory Services,
Private  Equity Management Services,
Project  Appraisal Services,
Loan  Syndication Services,
Debt  restructuring services ,
Consultancy  Services,
Distribution  of mutual fund units, and
Distribution  of insurance products.
5.5.3 For distribution of insurance  products, the PDs may comply with the guidelines contained in the
circular  DNBS(PD)CC.No.35/10.24/2003-04 dated February 10, 2004
issued by the  Department of Non-Banking Supervision, RBI as amended from time to time.
5.5.4 Specific approvals of other  regulators, if needed, should be obtained for undertaking the activities  detailed above.
5.5.5 PDs are
not
allowed to undertake broking in  equity, trading / broking in commodities, gold and foreign exchange.
5.5.6 The exposure to non-core  activities shall be subject to the guidelines on regulatory and prudential  norms for diversification of activities by standalone PDs.
5.5.7 PDs choosing to diversify into  non-core business segments should define internally the scope of  diversification, organization structure and reporting levels for those  segments. They should clearly lay down exposure and risk limits for those  segments in their Board approved investment policy.
5.6 The exposure to core and non-core activities of  PD shall be subject to risk capital allocation (credit risk & market risk)  as prescribed in RBI
Master  Circular IDMD.PDRD.02/03.64.00/2014-15 dated July 1, 2014
on “Capital  Adequacy Standards and Risk Management Guidelines for Standalone Primary  Dealers”.
6.
Norms for Ready Forward transactions
PDs are permitted to participate in ready forward  (Repo) market both as lenders and borrowers. The terms and conditions subject  to which repo contracts (including reverse repo contracts) may be entered into  by PDs will be as  under:
Repos may be undertaken in a) dated       securities, T-Bills and CMBs issued by the Government of India (GoI); and       b) dated securities issued by the State Governments.
Further,  PDs are permitted to undertake repo in Corporate bonds as given in the
circulars  RBI/2009-10/284-IDMD.DOD.No.05/11.08.38/2009-10 dated January 8, 2010
,
RBI/2010-11/268-IDMD.PCD.22/11.08.38/2010-11 dated November 9, 2010
. They are  also permitted to undertake repo in Commercial Papers, Certificates of Deposit  and Non-Convertible Debentures of less than one year of original maturity vide
circular  RBI/2012-13/365-IDMD.PCD.09/14.03.02/2012-13 dated January 7, 2013
. PDs shall adhere to the directions ‘Repo in  Corporate Debt Securities (Amendment) Directions, 2013’, as amended from time  to time.
Repos may be entered into only with scheduled  commercial banks, Urban Cooperative banks, other PDs, NBFCs, mutual funds,  housing finance companies, insurance companies and any listed company, provided they hold either an SGL account with RBI or a Gilt account with a  custodian.
Listed companies can enter into repo transactions  subject to the following conditions:
The  minimum period for Reverse Repo (lending of funds) by listed companies is seven  days. However, listed companies can borrow funds through repo for shorter  periods including overnight
;
Where the  listed company is a ‘buyer’ of securities in the first leg of the repo contract  (i.e. lender of funds), the custodian through which the repo transaction is  settled should block these securities in the gilt account and ensure that these  securities are not further sold or re-repoed during the repo  period but are held  for delivery under the  second leg; and
The  counterparty to the listed companies for repo/reverse repo transactions should  be either a bank or a PD maintaining SGL Account with the RBI.
A PD may not enter into a repo with its own  constituent or facilitate a repo between two of its constituents.
PDs should report all repos transacted by them  (both on own account and on the constituent's account) on the CCIL platform. All repos shall be settled through the SGL  Account/CSGL Account maintained with the RBI, Mumbai, with the CCIL acting as  the central counter party (CCP).
The purchase/sale price of the securities in the  first leg of a repo should be in alignment with the market rates prevalent on  the date of transaction.
Repo transactions, which are settled under the  guaranteed settlement mechanism of CCIL, may be rolled over, provided the  security prices and repo interest rate are renegotiated on roll over.
The Master Repo Agreement (MRA), as finalised by  FIMMDA, is not mandatory for repo transactions in G-Sec settling through a CCP.  However, MRA is mandatory for repo transactions in corporate debt securities,  which is settled bilaterally without involving a CCP.
PDs shall adhere to the guidelines for accounting  of Repo / Reverse Repo transactions issued vide
circular  RBI/2009-10/356 IDMD.No.4135/11.08.43/2009-10 dated March 23, 2010
, as  amended from time to time.
7.
Portfolio Management Services by PDs
7.1 PDs may  offer Portfolio Management Services (PMS) to their clients under the SEBI  scheme of PMS, subject to the following conditions:
Before undertaking PMS, the PD must have obtained the  Certificate of Registration as Portfolio Manager from the SEBI and also a  specific approval from the RBI.
PMS cannot be offered to any RBI regulated entity.  However, advisory services can be provided to them with suitable disclaimers.
Where applicable, the clients regulated by any other  authority should obtain clearance from the regulatory or any other authority  before entering into any PMS arrangement with the PD.
PDs are required to comply with the SEBI (Portfolio  Managers) Regulations, 1993 and any amendments issued thereto or instructions  issued there under.
7.2 In  addition, PDs should adhere to the under noted conditions:
A clear mandate from the PMS clients should be  obtained and the same may be strictly followed. In particular, there should be  full understanding on risk disclosures, loss potential and the costs (fees and  commissions) involved.
PMS should be entirely at the customer's risk without  guaranteeing, either directly or indirectly, any return.
Funds/securities,  each time they are placed with the PD for portfolio management, should not be  accepted for a period less than one year.
Portfolio  funds should not be deployed for lending in call/notice/term money/Bills  rediscounting markets, badla financing or lending to/placement with  corporate/non-corporate bodies.
Client-wise  accounts/records of funds accepted for management and investments made there  against should be maintained and the clients should be entitled to get  statements of account at frequent intervals.
Investments  and funds belonging to PMS clients should be kept segregated and distinct from  each other and from those of the PD. As far as possible, all client  transactions should be executed in the market and not off-set internally,  either with the PD or any other client. All transactions between the PD and any  PMS client or between two PMS clients should be strictly at market rates.
8.
Guidelines on Interest Rate Derivatives
8.1 PDs shall adhere to the guidelines applicable to interest rate  derivatives as laid down in
circular  DBOD.No.BP.BC.86 /21.04.157 /2006-07 dated April 20, 2007
as amended from  time to time and Interest Rate Futures (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2013 dated  December 05, 2013 issued by the RBI. Standalone PDs are allowed to deal in  Interest Rate Futures (IRFs) for both hedging and trading on own account and  not on client’s account, as given in the
circular  IDMD.PDRD.No.1056/03.64.00/2009-10 dated September 1, 2009
and as amended  from time to time.
8.2 As per  RBI
circular  IDMD/11.08.15/809/2007-08 dated August 23, 2007
, PDs are required to report all their IRS/FRA trades, except with  clients, on the CCIL reporting platform within 30 minutes from the deal time.  Further, as per
circular  FMD.MSRG.No.94/02.05.002/2013-14 dated December 4, 2013
, all transaction  with clients in INR FRA/IRS shall be reported before 12 noon of the following  business day.
9.
Guidelines on Credit Default Swaps
PDs shall  adhere to the guidelines laid down in
circular  IDMD.PCD.No.10 /14.03.04/2012-13 dated January 07, 2013
as applicable to  Credit Default Swaps. PDs intending to act as market makers in CDS shall  fulfill the following criteria:
Minimum  Net Owned Funds of Rs 500 crore
Minimum  CRAR of 15 percent
Have  robust risk management systems in place to deal with various risks
The  regulatory approval to PDs to act as market makers in the CDS market would be  accorded by the Chief General Manager, Internal Debt Management Department,  Central office, RBI, Mumbai on a case by case basis, on application for the  same.
10.
Investment Guidelines
10.1  Investment policy - PDs should frame and implement, a Board  approved, investment policy and operational guidelines on securities  transactions. The policy should contain  the broad objectives to be followed while undertaking transactions in  securities on their own account and on behalf of clients, clearly define the  authority to put through deals, and lay down procedure to be followed while  putting through deals, various prudential exposure limits, policy regarding  dealings through brokers, systems for management of various risks, guidelines  for valuation of the portfolio and the reporting systems etc. Operational  procedures and controls in relation to the day-to-day business operations  should also be worked out and put in place to ensure that operations in  securities are conducted in accordance with sound and acceptable business  practices. While laying down these guidelines, the PDs should strictly adhere  to RBI’s instructions, issued from time to time. The effectiveness of the  policy and operational guidelines should be periodically evaluated.
10.2 PDs should necessarily hold their investments in G-Sec portfolio in SGL  with RBI. They may also have a dematerialised (Demat) account with depositories  – National Securities Depository Limited / Central Depository Services (India)  Limited. All purchase/sale transactions in G-Sec by PDs should be through SGL /  Constituent SGL (CSGL) / Demat accounts.
10.3 PDs should hold all other  investments such as CPs, bonds and debentures (privately placed or otherwise)  and equity instruments, only in demat form.
10.4 All problem exposures, which are not backed by any security or  backed by security of doubtful value, should be fully provided for. Where  a PD has filed suit against another party for recovery, such exposures should  be evaluated and provisions made to the satisfaction of auditors. Any claim against  the PD should also be taken note of and provisions made to the satisfaction of  auditors.
10.5 The profit and loss account should  reflect the problem exposures if any, and also the effect of valuation of  portfolio, as per the instructions issued by the RBI, from time to time. The  report of the statutory auditors should contain a certification to this effect.
10.6 HTM  Portfolio
10.6.1 Standalone  PDs are allowed to categorize a portion  of their G-Sec portfolio in the HTM category, subject to the following  conditions:
The  transfer of securities (both Central  Government and State Government) to/from HTM portfolio shall be done as  per the policy formulated by the Board. Such transfers shall be permitted only  once in a quarter.
Transfer  of securities to/from HTM portfolio should be done with the approval of the  Board at the acquisition cost/ book value/ market value on the date of  transfer, whichever is the least, and the depreciation, if any, on such  transfer shall be fully provided for. PDs are allowed to shift investments  to/from HTM portfolio with the approval of the MD of the PD/Head of ALCO, only  in case of exigencies. However, it should be ratified by the Board.
Only  securities acquired by the PD under primary auction will be eligible for  classification under HTM category.
The  quantum of securities that can be classified as HTM shall be restricted to 200%  of the audited NOF of the PD as at the end March of the preceding financial  year.
The profit  on sale of securities, if any, from the HTM category shall first be taken to  the P & L Account and thereafter be appropriated to the “Reserve Account”;  loss on sale shall be recognized in the P & L Account.
Investments  classified under HTM will be carried  at acquisition cost, unless it is more than the face value, in which case the  premium should be amortized over the remaining period to maturity. The book  value of the security should continue to be reduced to the extent of the amount  amortized during the relevant accounting period.
The concurrent auditors should specifically verify  compliance with these instructions.
The facility shall be available until further  advice.
10.6.2 Banks undertaking PD activities departmentally may continue to follow the  extant guidelines applicable to banks with regard to the classification and  valuation of the investment portfolio issued by Department of Banking  Operations and Development (DBOD), RBI.
10.7 Guidelines  on investments in non-G-Sec
10.7.1 These  guidelines cover PD’s investments in non-G-Sec (including capital gain bonds,  bonds eligible for priority sector status, bonds issued by Central or State  public sector undertakings with or without Government guarantees and bonds  issued by banks and financial companies) generally issued by corporate, banks,  FIs and State and Central Government sponsored institutions, Special Purpose Vehicles  (SPVs), etc. These guidelines will, however, not be applicable to (i) units of  equity oriented mutual fund schemes where any part of the corpus can be  invested in equity, (ii) venture capital funds, (iii) CPs, (iv) CDs, and (v)  investments in equity shares. The guidelines will apply to investments both in  the primary and secondary market.
10.7.2 Standalone PDs are permitted to become members of SEBI approved Stock Exchanges  for the purpose of undertaking proprietary transactions in corporate bonds.  While doing so, standalone PDs should comply with all the regulatory norms laid  down by SEBI and all the eligibility criteria/rules of stock exchanges.
10.7.3 As per  RBI circular
IDMD.PCD.No.  2223/14.03.05 /2012-13 dated January 30, 2013
, Standalone  PDs are allowed a sub-limit of 50% of NOF for investment in corporate bonds within the overall permitted average  fortnightly limit of 225 per cent of NOF as at the end of March of the  preceding financial year for call /notice money market borrowing.
10.7.4 PDs should not invest in non-G-Sec  of original maturity of less than one year, other than NCDs, CPs and CDs, which  are covered under RBI guidelines. PDs  are permitted to invest in NCDs with original or initial maturity up to one  year issued by the corporates (including NBFCs). However, their investments in  such unlisted NCDs should not exceed 10 per cent of the size of their non-G-Sec  portfolio on an on-going basis. While investing in such instruments, PDs should  be guided by the extant prudential guidelines in force and instructions given  in the
circulars  IDMD.DOD.10/11.01.01(A)/2009-10 dated June 23, 2010
,
IDMD.PCD.No.24/14.03.03/2010-11 dated December 6, 2010
and
IDMD.PCD.08/14.03.03/2011-12  dated August 23, 2011
as amended from time to time.
10.7.5 PDs should undertake usual due diligence in  respect of investments in non-G-Sec.
10.7.6 PDs must not invest in unrated  non-G-Sec.
10.7.7 PDs will  abide by the requirements stipulated by the SEBI in respect of corporate debt  securities. Accordingly, while making fresh investments in non-Government debt  securities, PDs should ensure that such investments are made only in listed  debt securities, except to the extent indicated in paragraph 10.7.6.
10.7.8 PD's  investment in unlisted non-G-Sec should not exceed 10% of the size of their  non-G-Sec portfolio on an on-going basis
.
The ceiling of 10% will be inclusive of investment in Security Receipts issued  by Securitization Companies/Reconstruction Companies and also the investment in  ABS and MBS. The unlisted non-Government debt securities in which PDs may  invest up to the limits specified above, should comply with the disclosure  requirements as prescribed by the SEBI for listed companies.
10.7.9 As per SEBI guidelines, all trades with the exception of the  spot transactions, in a listed debt security, shall be executed only on the  trading platform of a stock exchange. As per guideline  issued vide
IDMD.PCD.  10 /14.03.06/ 2013-14 dated February 24, 2014
, OTC trades in Corporate  Bonds and Securitized Debt Instruments are to be reported within 15 minutes of  the trade on any of the stock exchanges (NSE, BSE and MCX-SX). Further as per  guidelines IDMD.No.1764/11.08.38/2009-10 dated October 16, 2009 and  IDMD.PCD.11/14.03.06/2012-13 dated June 26, 2013, these trades may be cleared  and settled through any of the clearing corporations (NSCCL, ICCL and MCX-SX  CCL).
10.7.10 PDs  should ensure that their investment policies are formulated after taking into  account all the relevant issues specified in these guidelines on investment in  non-G-Sec. They should put in place proper risk management systems for  capturing and analysing the risk in respect of non-G-Sec before making  investments and taking remedial measures in time. PDs should also put in place  appropriate systems to ensure that investment in privately placed instruments  is made in accordance with the systems and procedures prescribed under  respective PD’s investment policy.
10.7.11 Boards of the PDs should review the following  aspects of investment in non-G-Sec at least at quarterly intervals:
Total  business (investment and divestment) during the reporting period.
Compliance  with the prudential limits as well as prudential guidelines prescribed by the  Board for investment in non-G-Sec.
Rating  migration of the issuers/ issues held in the PD’s books.
10.7.12 In order to help creation of a central database on private  placement of debt, a copy of all offer documents should be filed with the Credit  Information Bureau (India) Ltd. (CIBIL) by  the PDs. Further, any default relating to  interest/ installment in respect of any privately placed debt should also be  reported to CIBIL by the investing PDs along with a copy of the offer  document.
10.8 Exposure Norms
10.8.1 Exposure norms for standalone PDs  will be guided by RBI
circular  IDMD.PCD. 12/14.03.05/ 2013-14 dated March 27, 2014
. The extant norms are  as follows:
The  exposure ceiling limits would be 25 percent of latest audited Net Owned Funds  (NOF) in case of a single borrower/counterparty and 40 percent of NOF in case  of a group borrower/counterparty.
The  ceilings on single /group exposure limit would not be applicable where  principal and interest are fully guaranteed by the Government of India.
PDs  should include credit risk exposures to all other categories of non-Government  securities including investments in mutual funds, commercial papers,  certificate of deposits, positions in OTC derivatives not settled through  Qualifying CCP (QCCP) etc. to compute extent of credit exposure to adhere to  the prescribed prudential limits.
Clearing  exposure to a QCCP will be kept outside of the exposure ceiling of 25 per cent  of its NOF applicable to a single counter party.
Clearing  exposure to QCCP would include trade exposure and default fund exposure as  defined in the guidelines on capital requirements for PDs’ exposure to central  counterparties issued vide
Circular  IDMD.PCD.11/14.03.05/2013-14 dated March 27, 2014
.
Other  permissible exposures to QCCPs such as investments in the capital of CCP etc.  will continue to be within the existing exposure ceiling of 25 per cent of NOF  to a single borrower/counterparty. However, all exposures of a PD to a non-QCCP  should be within the exposure ceiling of 25 per cent.
Presently,  there are four CCPs viz. Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL), National  Securities Clearing Corporation Ltd. (NSCCL), Indian Clearing Corporation Ltd.  (ICCL), and MCX-SX Clearing Corporation Ltd. (MCX-SXCCL) that are subjected, on  an ongoing basis, to rules and regulations that are consistent with CPSS-IOSCO  Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures. While the CCIL has been  granted the status of a QCCP by the Reserve Bank, the other three CCPs have  been granted the status of QCCP by SEBI.
It  may also be mentioned that the status of a CCP as a QCCP may change in future,  if a regulator/supervisor of the CCP withdraws the status of QCCP. After  withdrawal of the status of a QCCP, the CCP will be considered a non-QCCP and  exposure norms as applicable to non-QCCPs would be applicable.
10.8.2 PDs should  calculate exposure for various items as per
Master  Circular IDMD.PDRD.02/03.64.00/2014-15 dated July 1, 2014
on “Capital  Adequacy Standards and Risk Management Guidelines for Standalone Primary  Dealers”.
11.
Prudential Systems/Controls
11.1 PDs shall have an efficient internal control system for fair conduct of  business, settlement of trades and maintenance of accounts.
PDs should maintain adequate  physical infrastructure and skilled manpower for efficient participation in  primary issues, trading in the secondary market, and to advise and educate  investors.
In respect of transactions in  G-Sec, a PD should have a separate desk and maintain separate accounts in  respect of its own position and customer transactions and subject them to  external audit also.
All the transactions put  through by the PD either on outright basis or ready forward basis should be  reflected on the same day in its books and records i.e. preparation of deal  slip, contract note, confirmation of the counter party, recording of the  transaction in the purchase/sale registers, etc.
For       every transaction entered into, the trading desk should generate a deal       slip which should contain data relating to nature of the deal, name of the       counterparty, whether it is a direct deal or through a broker, and if       through a broker, name of the broker, details of security, amount, price,       contract date and time and settlement date. The deal slips should be serially       numbered and controlled separately to ensure that each deal slip has been       properly accounted for. Once the       deal is concluded, the deal slip should be immediately passed on to the       back office for recording and processing.       For each deal, there must be a system of issue of confirmation to       the counter-party. In view of the reporting and confirmation of OTC trades       on Negotiated Dealing System (NDS) and guaranteed settlement through CCIL,       the requirement to exchange written confirmation for OTC trades in G-Sec       has been dispensed with. With respect to transactions matched on the       NDS-OM module, separate counterparty confirmation of deals is not required.
Once       a deal has been concluded, there should not be any substitution of the       counter-party by the broker. Similarly, the security sold/purchased in a       deal should not be substituted by another security under any       circumstances.
On       the basis of vouchers passed by the back office (which should be done       after verification of actual contract notes received from the       broker/counter-party and confirmation of the deal by the counter party),       the books of account should be independently prepared.
PDs       should periodically review securities transactions and report to the top       management, the details of transactions in securities, details of       funds/securities delivery failures, even in cases where shortages have       been met by CCIL.
All security       transactions (including transactions on account of clients) should be       subjected to concurrent audit by internal/external auditors to the extent       of 100% and the results of the audit should be placed before the CEO/MD of       the PD once every month. The compliance should be monitored on ongoing       basis and reported directly to the top management. The concurrent audit should also cover the business done       through brokers and include the findings in their report.
The       scope of concurrent audit should include monitoring of broker wise limits,       prudential limits laid down by RBI, accuracy and timely submission of all       regulatory returns, reconciliation of SGL/CSGL balances with PDO       statements, reconciliation of current account balance with DAD statements,       settlements through CCIL, stipulations with respect to short sale deals,       when-issued transactions, constituent deals, money market deals, adherence       to accounting standards, verification of deal slips, reasons for       cancellation of deals, if any, transactions with related parties on ‘arm’s       length basis’, provisions related to HTM portfolio etc.
PDs       should have a system of internal audit focused on monitoring the efficacy       and adequacy of internal control systems.
With       the approval of their Board, PDs should put in place appropriate exposure       limits / dealing limits, for each of their counterparties which cover all       dealings with such counter parties including money market, repos and       outright securities transactions. These limits should be reviewed       periodically on the basis of financial statements, market reports,       ratings, etc. and exposures taken only on a fully collateralized basis       where there is slippage in the rating/assessment of any counterparty.
With       the approval of their Boards, PDs should put in place reasonable leverage       ratio for their operations, which should take into account all outside       borrowings as a multiplier of their NOF.
There       should be a clear functional separation of (i) trading (front office);       (ii) risk management (mid office); and (iii) settlement, accounting and       reconciliation (back office).       Similarly, there should be a separation of transactions relating to       own account and constituents’ accounts.
PDs       should have an Audit Committee of the Board (ACB) which should meet at       least at quarterly intervals. The ACB should peruse the findings of the       various audits and should ensure efficacy and adequacy of the audit       function.
11.2 Purchase/Sale of securities through SGL  transfer forms
All PDs should report / conclude their transactions on NDS / NDS-OM and  clear/settle them through CCIL as central counter-party. In such cases where  exceptions have been permitted to tender physical SGL transfer forms, the following  guidelines should be followed:
Records of all SGL transfer forms issued/received should be maintained and a  system for verification of the authenticity of the SGL transfer forms received  from the counter-party and confirmation of authorized signatories should be put  in place.
Under no circumstances, a SGL transfer form issued by a PD in favour of counterparty  should bounce for want of sufficient balance in the SGL/Current Account. Any  instance of return of SGL form from the Public Debt Office (PDO) of the RBI for  want of sufficient balance in the account should be immediately brought to the  notice of the PD’s top management and reported to RBI with the details of  transactions.
SGL  Transfer forms received by purchasing PDs should be deposited in their SGL  Accounts immediately. No sale should be effected by way of return of SGL form  held by the PD.
SGL  transfer form should be in a standard format, prescribed by the RBI, and  printed on semi-security paper of uniform size. They should be serially  numbered and there should be a control system in place to account for each SGL  form.
11.3 Bank Receipt or similar receipt should not  be issued or accepted by the PDs under any circumstances in respect of  transactions in G-Sec.
11.4 Accounting Standards for securities  transactions
All  securities in trading portfolio should be marked to market, at appropriate  intervals.
Costs such  as brokerage fees, commission or taxes incurred at the time of acquisition of  securities, are of revenue/deferred nature. The broken period interest  received/paid also gets adjusted at the time of coupon payment. PDs can adopt either the IAS or GAAP accounting  standards, but have to ensure that the method should be true and fair and  should not result in overstating the profits or assets value. It should be  followed consistently and be generally acceptable especially to the tax  authorities.
Broken  period interest paid to seller as part of cost on acquisition of Government and  other securities should not be capitalized but treated as an item of  expenditure under Profit and Loss Account. The PDs may maintain separate  adjustment accounts for the broken period interest.
The  valuation of the securities portfolio should be independent of the dealing and  operations functions and should be done by obtaining the prices declared by  FIMMDA periodically.
PDs should publish their audited annual results in leading financial  dailies and on their website in the format prescribed
(Annex VIII)
. The  following minimum information should also be included by way of notes on  accounts to the Balance Sheet:
Net  borrowings in call (average and peak during the period),
Basis of  valuation,
Leverage  Ratio (average and peak),
CRAR  (quarterly figures), and
Details of  the issuer composition of non-G-Sec investments.
PDs may also furnish more information by way  of additional disclosures.
11.5 Reconciliation  of holdings of G-Sec
Balances  as per books of PDs should be reconciled at least at monthly intervals with the  balances in the books of PDOs. If the number of transactions so warrant, the  reconciliation should be undertaken at more frequent intervals. This reconciliation should be periodically verified  during concurrent/internal audit of the PDs.
11.6. Transactions on  behalf of Constituents
The PDs  should undertake all due diligence while acting as agent of their clients for  carrying out transactions in securities.
PDs should  not use the constituents’ funds or assets for proprietary trading or for  financing of another intermediary’s operations.
All  transaction records should give a clear indication that the transaction belongs  to constituent and does not belong to PD’s own account.
The  transactions on behalf of constituents and the operations in the CSGL accounts  should be conducted in accordance with the guidelines issued by RBI on the CSGL  accounts.
PDs who  act as custodians (i.e. CSGL account holders) and offer the facility of maintaining  gilt accounts to their constituents, should not permit settlement of any sale  transaction by their constituents unless the security sold is actually held in  the gilt account of the constituent.
Indirect  access to NDS-OM has been permitted to certain segments of investors through  banks and PDs vide
circular  IDMD.DOD.No.5893/10.25.66/2007-08 dated May 27, 2008
. PDs should adhere to  the guidelines on maintenance of gilt accounts and investments on behalf of  gilt account holders while undertaking 'constituent deals' on NDS-OM.
11.7 Failure  to complete delivery of security/funds in an SGL transaction
Any  default in delivery of security/funds in an SGL sale /purchase transaction  undertaken by a PD will be viewed seriously. A report on such transaction, even  if completed through the securities/funds shortage handling procedure of CCIL,  must be submitted to the IDMD, RBI immediately. In terms of
circular  RBI/2010-11/115-IDMD.DOD.17/11.01.01(B)/2010-11 dated July 14, 2010
, for any  default in delivery of security / funds in a SGL sale / purchase transaction  undertaken by a PD (event of bouncing of SGL transfer forms) and the failure of  the PD to offer satisfactory explanation for such bouncing of SGL, the PD shall  be liable to pay penalties as per the circular ibid.
12.
Trading of G-Sec on Stock Exchanges
12.1 With a view to encouraging wider participation  of all classes of investors, including retail, in G-Sec, trading in G-Sec  through a nationwide, anonymous, order driven screen based trading system on  stock exchanges, in the same manner in which trading takes place in equities,  has been permitted. Accordingly, trading of dated G-Sec in demat form is  allowed on automated order driven system of the National Stock Exchange (NSE)  of India, the Bombay Stock Exchange Ltd., Mumbai (BSE), the Over the Counter  Exchange of India (OTCEI) and the MCX Stock Exchange.  This trading facility is in addition to the reporting/trading facility in the NDS.  Being a parallel system, the trades concluded on the exchanges will be cleared  by their respective clearing corporations/clearing houses.
12.2 PDs are expected to play an active  role in providing liquidity to the G-Sec market and promote retailing. They  may, therefore, make full use of the facility to distribute G-Sec to all  categories of investors through the process of placing and picking-up orders on  the exchanges. PDs may open demat accounts with a Depository Participant (DP)  of NSDL/CDSL in addition to their accounts with RBI. Value free transfer of securities between  SGL/CSGL and own demat account is enabled by PDO-Mumbai subject to guidelines  issued by Department of Government and Bank Accounts (DGBA), RBI.
12.3 Guidelines
PDs should take specific approval from their Board to enable them to  trade in the Stock Exchanges.
PDs may undertake transactions only on the basis of  giving and taking delivery of securities.
Brokers/trading members shall not be involved in the settlement process. All trades have to be settled either directly  with clearing corporation/clearing house (in case they are clearing members) or  else through clearing member custodians.
The trades done through any single broker will also be subject to the  current regulations on transactions done through brokers.
A standardized settlement on T+1 basis of all outright secondary market  transactions in G-Sec has been adopted to provide the participants more  processing time for transactions and to help in better funds as well as risk  management.
In the case of repo transactions in G-Sec, however, market participants  will have the choice of settling the first leg on either T+0 basis or T+1 basis,  as per their requirements.
Any settlement failure on account of non-delivery of securities/  non-availability of clear funds will be treated as SGL bouncing and the current  penalties in respect of SGL transactions will be applicable. Stock Exchanges will  report such failures to the respective PDOs.
PDs who are trading members  of the Stock Exchanges may have to put up margins on behalf of their  non-institutional client trades. Such margins are required to be collected from  the respective clients. PDs are not permitted to pay up margins on behalf of  their client trades and incur overnight credit exposure to their clients. In so  far as the intraday exposures on clients for margins are concerned, the PDs  should be conscious of the underlying risks in such exposures.
PDs who intend to offer clearing /custodial services should take  specific approval from SEBI in this regard. Similarly, PDs who intend to take  trading membership of the Stock Exchanges should satisfy the criteria laid down  by SEBI and the Stock Exchanges.
13.
Business  through brokers
13.1 Business through brokers and limits for  approved brokers
PDs may undertake  securities transactions among themselves or with clients through the members of  the BSE, NSE and OTCEI. However, if the PDs undertake OTC interest rate  derivative transactions through brokers, they should ensure that these brokers  are accredited by FIMMDA. PDs should fix  aggregate contract limits for each of the approved brokers. A limit of 5% of total broker transactions  (both purchase and sales) entered into by a PD during a year should be treated  as the aggregate upper limit for each of the approved brokers. However, if for  any reason it becomes necessary to exceed the aggregate limit for any broker,  the specific reasons thereof should be recorded and the Board should be  informed of this, post facto.
13.2 With the approval of their top  management, PDs should prepare a panel of approved brokers, which should be  reviewed annually or more often if so warranted. Clear-cut criteria should be  laid down for empanelment of brokers, including verification of their  creditworthiness, market reputation, etc.  A record of broker-wise details of deals put through and brokerage paid,  should be maintained.
13.3 Brokerage payable to the broker, if  any (if the deal was put through with the help of a broker), should be clearly  indicated on the notes/memorandum put up seeking approval for putting through  the transaction, and a separate account of brokerage paid, broker-wise, should  be maintained.
13.4 The role of the broker should be  restricted to that of bringing the two parties to the deal together. Settlement of deals between PDs and  counter-parties should be directly between the counter-parties and the broker  will have no role in the settlement process.
13.5 While negotiating the deal, the  broker is not obliged to disclose the identity of the counter-party to the  deal. On conclusion of the deal, he  should disclose the counter-party and his contract note should clearly indicate  the name of the counter-party.
14.
Guidelines on declaration of dividend
PDs should follow the following guidelines while declaring dividend  distribution:
The PD  should have complied with the regulations on transfer of profits to statutory  reserves and the regulatory guidelines relating to provisioning and valuation  of securities, etc.
PDs having  CRAR below the regulatory minimum of 15 per cent in any of the previous four  quarters cannot declare any dividend. For PDs having CRAR at or above the  regulatory minimum of 15 per cent during all the four quarters of the previous  year, but lower than 20 per cent in any of the four quarters, the dividend  payout ratio (DPR) should not exceed 33.3 per cent. For PDs having CRAR at 20  per cent or above during all the four quarters of the previous year, the DPR  should not exceed 50 per cent. DPR should be calculated as a percentage of  dividend payable in a year (excluding dividend tax) to net profit during the  year.
The  proposed dividend should be payable out of the current year’s profits. In case  the profit for the relevant period includes any extraordinary income, the  payout ratio should be computed after excluding such extraordinary items for  reckoning compliance with the prudential payout ratio ceiling.
The  financial statements pertaining to the financial year for which the PD is  declaring dividend should be free of any qualifications by the statutory  auditors, which have an adverse bearing on the profit during that year. In case of any qualification to that effect,  the net profit should be suitably adjusted downward while computing the DPR.
In case  there are special reasons or difficulties for any PD in strictly adhering to  the guidelines, it may approach RBI in advance for an appropriate
ad hoc
dispensation in this regard.
All the  PDs declaring dividend should report details of dividend declared during the  accounting year as per the prescribed pro forma
(Annex X)
along with the  Board resolution passed for declaration of dividend. The report should be furnished within a  fortnight of payment of dividend.
15.
Guidelines on Corporate  Governance
PDs may  adhere to
circular  DNBS.PD/CC 94/03.10.042/2006-07 dated May 8, 2007
on guidelines on  corporate governance, as amended from time to time.
16.
Prevention of Money Laundering  Act, 2002 - Obligations of NBFCs
PDs shall adhere to the guidelines contained in
circular  DNBS(PD).CC.68 /03.10.042/2005-06 dated April  5, 2006
, as amended from time to time, on the prevention  of money laundering.
17.
Violation/Circumvention of Instructions
Any  violation/circumvention of the above guidelines or the terms and conditions of  the undertaking executed by a PD with RBI (
Annex I
) would be viewed  seriously and such violation would attract penal action including the  withdrawal of liquidity support, denial of access to the money market,  withdrawal of authorization for carrying on the business as a PD, and/or  imposition of monetary penalty or liquidated damages, as the RBI may deem fit.
18.
Disclosure of Penal Actions
18.1 In  order to maintain transparency with regard to imposition of penalties and in  conformity with the best practices on disclosure of penalties imposed by the  regulator, the details of the penalty levied on a PD shall be placed in the  public domain.
18.2 The  mode of disclosures of penalties, imposed by RBI will be as follows:
A  Press Release will be issued by the RBI, giving details of the circumstances  under which the penalty is imposed on the PD along with the communication onthe imposition of penalty in public domain.
The  penalty shall also be disclosed in the 'Notes on Accounts' to the Balance Sheet  of the PD in its next Annual Report.
19.
Exit /Termination  procedure:
19.1 RBI may suspend or terminate a PD, as it may deem fit, in  the following circumstances:
Violation/circumvention  of the regulatory guidelines or the terms and conditions of the undertaking executed  by a PD with the RBI.
Failure to  meet the performance criteria and capital standards on an ongoing basis.
Repeatedly  providing bids and offers in the primary and/or secondary market that are not  reasonably competitive.
RBI is of the view that the PD has attempted to manipulate the market;  involved in market abuse; made an incorrect representation or certification;  failed to provide information required under the extant guidelines, or provided  information that was incorrect, inaccurate, or incomplete.
If it  appears, in the Reserve Bank’s judgment that the PD has an inadequate or weak  control environment.
If a PD  becomes the subject of, or involved with, regulatory or legal proceedings that,  in the judgment of the Reserve Bank, unfavorably impacts the PD business.
PD intends  to surrender PD authorisation on its own. In such a case, the PD should discuss  the orderly unwinding of any positions held, agree the timing and date of  termination of PD operations, and the content of any announcements to be made  to the market, by the Reserve Bank. In the interests of discouraging  ‘fair-weather’ trading and ensure that a PD is available in the market even  when the market condition is not favourable, the Reserve Bank will not approve  an application from the same firm for a fresh PD authorisation for some  considerable period of time.
19.2 RBI will notify the PD of its  intention to impose a sanction, and will provide the PD with an opportunity to  submit its view, before taking a final decision.
19.3 RBI  will ensure that a PD’s exit is carried out in a way that does not cause undue  disruptions to other market participants.
19.4 Such suspension or termination  will be made public by RBI through press release. An announcement in this  regard shall be made preferably on the last working day of the week, with the  sanction effective from the close of business on the same day.
20. List of circulars consolidated and list of circulars referred are enclosed at  Annex XI and XII respectively.
Section II: Additional  Guidelines applicable to banks undertaking
PD business  departmentally
1.
Introduction
Scheduled commercial banks (except Regional Rural Banks) have been permitted  to undertake PD business departmentally from 2006-07.
2.
Procedure for Authorization of bank-PDs
2.1 Banks  eligible to apply for undertaking PD business, [please see eligibility  conditions at paragraph 1.2.1 of Section I above] may approach the Chief  General Manager, DBOD, RBI, Central Office. On obtaining an in-principle  approval from DBOD, banks may apply to the Chief General Manager, IDMD, RBI, 23rd  Floor, Central Office Building, Fort, Mumbai - 400 001 for an authorization for undertaking  PD business departmentally.
2.2 The  banks, proposing to undertake the PD business by merging / taking over PD  business from their partly / wholly owned subsidiary, or foreign banks,  operating in India, proposing to undertake PD business departmentally by  merging the PD business being undertaken by a group company, will be subject to  the terms and conditions, as applicable, of the undertaking given by such  subsidiary/ group company till such time a fresh undertaking is executed by the  bank.
2.3 The banks  authorized to undertake PD business will be required to have a standing  arrangement with RBI based on the execution of an undertaking
(Annex I)
and the authorization letter  issued by RBI every three years (July-June). Undertaking will be based on  passing of a fresh Board resolution by the PD every three years.
3.
Applicability  of guidelines issued for PDs
3.1 The bank-PDs would be governed by the  operational guidelines as given in Section – I above, to the extent applicable,  unless otherwise stated. Furthermore, the  bank-PDs' role and obligations in terms of  supporting the primary market auctions for issue of dated G-Sec and T-Bills/CMBs,  underwriting of dated G-Sec, market-making in G-Sec and secondary market  turnover in G-Sec will also be at par with those applicable to standalone PDs  as enumerated in Section - I of this Master Circular.
3.2 Bank-PDs are expected to join  PDAI and FIMMDA and abide by the code of conduct framed by them and such other  actions initiated by them in the interest of the securities market.
3.3 The  requirement of ensuring minimum investment in G-Sec and T-Bills on a daily  basis, based on net call / RBI borrowing and NOF will not be applicable to  bank-PDs who shall be guided by the extant  guidelines applicable to banks.
3.4 As banks have access to the call  money market, refinance facility and the LAF of RBI, bank-PDs will not have  separate access to these facilities and liquidity support as applicable to the  standalone PDs.
3.5 The guidelines issued vide
circular  IDMD.No/2130/11.01.01 (D)/2006-07 dated November 16, 2006
on ’When-issued’  trades will be applicable to bank-PDs also.
3.6 Bank-PDs shall be guided by the  extant guidelines applicable to banks as regards borrowing in call/notice/term  money market, ICDs, FCNR (B) loans /External Commercial Borrowings and other  sources of funds.
3.7 The investment policy of the bank  may be suitably amended to include PD activities also. Within the overall  framework of the investment policy, the  PD business undertaken by the bank will be limited to dealing, underwriting and  market-making in G-Sec. Investments in Corporate / PSU / FIs bonds, CPs,  CDs, debt mutual funds and other fixed income securities will not be deemed to  be a part of PD business.
3.8 The classification, valuation and  operation of investment portfolio guidelines as applicable to banks in regard  to "Held for Trading" portfolio will also apply to the portfolio of G-Sec  including T-Bills/CMBs earmarked for PD business.
3.9 The G-Sec including T-Bills/CMBs  under PD business will count for SLR purpose.
3.10 Bank-PDs shall be guided by the  extant guidelines applicable to banks as regards business through brokers, repo  transactions, interest rate derivatives (OTC & exchange traded), investment  in non-G-Sec, Issue of Subordinated Debt Instruments and declaration of  dividend.
4.
Maintenance  of books and accounts
4.1 The  transactions related to PD business, undertaken by a bank departmentally,  should be executed through the existing SGL account of the bank. However,  Bank-PDs need to maintain distinct PD book as per DBOD guidelines
RBI/2006-07/104  DBOD.FSD.BC. No.25/24.92.001/2006-07 dated August 9, 2006
. The decision regarding maintaining a PD book as  part of HFT-G-Sec portfolio or treating the entire HFT-G-Sec- portfolio as PD  book is left to the banks. However, banks may clearly indicate in their  investment policy the intention of denoting the whole or part of HFT-G-Sec book  as PD book with the approval of their Board/ALCO.
4.2 Bank-PDs  shall decide about classification (HTM/AFS/HFT-G-Sec-bank/HFT-G-Sec-PD) of  securities allotted in the primary auction/purchased in the secondary market,  at the time of acquisition of the securities.
4.3 It should  be ensured that, at any point of time, there is a minimum balance of Rs.100  crore of G-Sec earmarked for PD business.
4.4 Bank-PDs  should subject 100 per cent of the transactions and regulatory returns  submitted by PD department to concurrent audit. An auditor’s certificate for  having maintained the minimum stipulated balance of Rs.100 crore of G-Sec in  the PD-book on an ongoing basis and having adhered to the  guidelines/instructions issued by RBI should be forwarded to IDMD, RBI on a quarterly  basis.
5.
Capital  Adequacy and Risk Management
5.1 The capital adequacy and risk  management guidelines applicable to a bank undertaking PD activity  departmentally, will be as per the extant guidelines applicable to banks. In  other words, for the purpose of assessing the bank's capital adequacy  requirement and coverage under risk management framework, the PD activity  should also be taken into account.
5.2 The bank undertaking PD activity  may put in place adequate risk management systems to measure and provide for  the risks emanating from the PD activity.
6.
Supervision by RBI
6.1 The  banks authorized to undertake PD business departmentally are required to submit  prescribed periodic returns to RBI promptly. The current list of such returns  and their periodicity, etc. is furnished in
Annex II- C
.
6.2 Reserve Bank reserves its right to amend  or modify the above guidelines from time to time, as may be considered  necessary.
Annex I
Format of Undertaking
To
The Chief General Manager,
Internal Debt Management  Department,
Reserve Bank of India,
Central Office Building,
Mumbai - 400 001
By
………………………………………………………………..
Registered Office ……………………………………………..
…………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………….
WHEREAS the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has offered  in principle to permit us to undertake Primary Dealer (PD) activity in  Government securities in accordance with the Guidelines issued thereon from  time to time.
AND WHEREAS as a precondition to our being  authorized to undertake PD activity we are required to furnish an undertaking  covering the relative terms and conditions.
AND WHEREAS at the duly convened Board of Directors  meeting of ________________ on __________, the Board has authorised  Shri/Smt./Kum. _________________ and Shri/Smt./Kum. __________________ to  execute and furnish an UNDERTAKING
for the period July ….. to June …….
to the RBI jointly and severally as set out below:
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the RBI  agreeing to permit us to undertake PD activity, we hereby undertake and agree:
1. To commit to aggregatively bid in the auction of Treasury Bills (TBs),  including Cash Management Bills (CMBs) to the extent of
specific
per  cent of each issue of auction Treasury Bills/Cash Management Bills
as  decided every year (April-March)
and for a minimum amount equal to the  underwriting commitment (allotted under Minimum Underwriting Commitment and  Additional Competitive Underwriting) for GoI Dated Securities and to maintain  the success ratio in aggregate winning bids at not less than 40 per cent for  TBs and CMBs
or such other percent as may be notified by RBI keeping in view  the relevant factors.
2. To offer to underwrite primary issues of GoI dated securities, TBs,  CMBs, and State Government securities, for which auction is held, and accept  devolvement, if any, of any amount as may be determined by RBI in terms of  prevalent scheme for Bidding/Underwriting.
3. a) To determine prudential ceilings, with the prior approval of the  Board of Directors (Board) of the company, for reliance on borrowings from the  money market including repos, as a multiple of net owned funds, subject to the  guidelines, if any, issued by the RBI in this regard (applicable to standalone  PDs only).
b) To adhere to prudential ceilings, with the  prior approval of the Board of the bank, subject to the guidelines, if any,  issued by the RBI in this regard  (applicable to bank-PDs only).
4. To offer firm two-way quotes through NDS / NDS-OM, over the counter  telephone market / recognised Stock Exchanges in India and deal in the  secondary market in Government dated securities and TBs of varying maturity  from time to time and take principal positions.
5. To achieve a sizeable portfolio in Government securities and to actively  trade in the Government securities market.
6. To achieve an annual turnover of not less than 5 times in Government  dated securities and not less than 10 times in TBs/CMBs of the average of  month-end stocks (
in the book separately  maintained for the PD business)
subject to the turnover in respect of  outright transactions being not less than 3 times in Government dated  securities and 6 times in TBs /CMBs
or as may be notified by RBI from time  to time..
7.
To maintain the capital adequacy standards prescribed by the RBI, and to  subject ourselves to all prudential and regulatory guidelines as may be issued  by the RBI from time to time.
8. To maintain adequate infrastructure in terms of both physical apparatus  and skilled manpower for efficient participation in primary issues, trading in  the secondary market, and for providing advice and education to investors.
9. To adhere to “Guidelines on Securities Transaction to be followed by  PDs” issued vide circular IDMC.No.PDRS/2049-A/03.64.00/99-2000 dated December  31, 1999 and Master Circulars issued from time to time and put in place  necessary internal control systems for fair conduct of business and settlement  of trades and maintenance of accounts.
10. To comply with all applicable RBI /Securities and Exchange Board of  India (SEBI) requirements under the existing guidelines and which may be laid  down from time to time in this behalf, failing which RBI would be at liberty to  cancel the authorisation as a PD.
11. To abide by the code of conduct as laid down by RBI/SEBI, the Primary  Dealers’ Association of India (PDAI) and the Fixed Income, Money Markets and  Derivatives Association of India (FIMMDA).
12. To maintain separate books of account for transactions relating to PD  business (distinct from the normal banking business) with necessary audit  trails and to ensure that, at any point of time, there is a minimum balance of  Rs.100 crore of Government securities
or as may be notified by RBI from time  to time
earmarked for PD business (applicable to bank-PDs only).
13. To maintain and preserve such information, records, books and documents  pertaining to our working as a PD as may be specified by the RBI from time to  time.
14. To permit the RBI to inspect all records, books, information, documents  and make available the records to the officers deputed by the RBI for  inspection/scrutiny and render all necessary assistance.
15. To maintain at all times a minimum net owned funds of Rs.150 crore /  Rs.250 crore
or as may be prescribed by RBI from time to time
in  Government securities and to deploy the liquidity support from the RBI, net  borrowings from call money market and net repo borrowings exclusively in  Government securities (applicable to  standalone PDs only).
16. To maintain an arm’s length relationship in transactions with group and  related entities.
17. To obtain prior approval of RBI  for any change in the shareholding pattern of the company (applicable to  standalone PDs only).
18. To submit in prescribed formats periodic reports including daily  transactions and market information, monthly report of details of transactions  in securities and risk position and performance with regard to participation in  auctions, annual audited accounts and an annual performance review and such  statements, certificates and other documents and information as may be  specified by RBI from time to time.
19. To report the matter immediately to Internal Debt Management  Department of the RBI and abide by such  orders, instructions, decisions or rulings given by the RBI if and when any  kind of investigation/inquiry/inspection is initiated against us by statutory/regulatory  authorities, e.g. SEBI/RBI, Stock Exchanges, Enforcement Directorate,  Income-tax authorities etc.
20. To pay an amount of Rupees Five Lakh, or as applicable, to the RBI, for  violation of any of the instructions issued by the RBI in the matter or for  non-compliance with any of the undertakings given hereinabove.
We do hereby confirm that the above undertakings  will be binding on our successors and assigns.
Dated this           day of                     Two  Thousand …………..
Signed, sealed and delivered by the within named,   )
being the authorized persons, in terms of the           )
Resolution No._______ of the Board )
at the duly convened Meeting held on___________  )
in the in the presence of _______________            )
Signatory (i)
(ii)
Witness   (i)
(ii)
Notes:
1. Para 3.a, 15 and 17 are applicable to standalone PDs only.
Para 3.b, words in italics in para 6 and para 12 are applicable to bank-PDs only.
Annex II-A
Statements / Returns required to be submitted by PDs  to IDMD
Sr. No.
Return/Report
Periodicity
Last date for submission
Reference under which    required
1.
PDR-I*
(Sources and application of funds maintained on daily basis)
Fortnightly
Next    working day of the reporting fortnight.
PD    Guidelines
2.
PDR-II*
(Securities    market turnover on monthly basis)
Monthly
10th    of the following month.
3.
PDR-III*
(Statement    on capital adequacy)
Quarterly
15th    of the month following the reporting quarter in the prescribed format    enclosed as Annex of the Master circular on Capital Adequacy Standards and    Risk Management Guidelines for standalone PDs.
4.
PDR IV*
(Financial and balance sheet indicators)
Quarterly
15th    of the month following the reporting quarter.
5.
Return    on FRAs / IRS*
Monthly
10th    of the following month.
6.
Annual    Report & Annual Audited A/cs
Annual
As    soon as annual accounts are audited and finalized.
7.
Auditor's    Certificate on Net Owned Funds
Yearly
30th    June.
8.
Details    of dividend declared during the accounting year
Yearly
Within    a fortnight from the payment of dividend.
* Returns to be  submitted on XBRL online platform
Annex II-B
Statements / Returns required to be submitted by  PDs
to departments other than IDMD of Reserve Bank of  India
Sr. No.
Return/Report
Periodicity
To be filed with Dept.
Reference under which    required
1.
Return on FRAs / IRS
Fortnightly
MPD
MPD.BC.187/07.01.279/1999-2000    dated July 7, 1999.
2.
Statement showing balances of Govt. Securities    held on behalf of each Gilt A/c holder
Half-Yearly
PDO
3.
Return on Call Money transactions with Commercial    Banks
Fortnightly
DEPR
4.
Information for Issue of Commercial Paper
On each
issue of CP
MPD
IECD.2/08.15.01/2001-02 dated July 23, 2001.
Note: The last date prescribed for submission of  these statements by the departments concerned and/or IDMD should be adhered to.
Annex  II-C
Statements / Returns required to be submitted by  banks
on their Primary Dealership business to IDMD
Sr. No.
Return/Report
Periodicity
Last date for submission
1.
PDR-II (format enclosed as Annex VI)
*
Monthly
10th of the following month.
2.
Concurrent auditor certificate for having    maintained the minimum stipulated balance of Rs. 100 crore of G-Sec in the    PD-book on an ongoing basis.
Quarterly
15th of the month following the reporting quarter.
3.
Annual    Report on PD activity of the bank.
Annual
Within 30 days of the finalization of audited    accounts.
* Returns  to be submitted on XBRL online platform
Annex IV
Illustrations showing PDs’  Commitment to
T-Bills / CMBs auctions and  Success Ratio
A PD has  committed to bid aggregatively Rs. 500 crore in T-Bills as shown below. The  success ratio to be maintained by the PD is 40 per cent in respect of T- Bills/CMBs.  Various scenarios in respect of fulfillment of the bidding commitment and the  success ratio assuming that the bids tendered and the bids accepted will be as  under:
T-Bills/CMBs:
(Rs.  crore)
SCENARIOS
(I)
(II)
(III)
Bidding Commitment (a)
500
500
500
Bids Tendered          (b)
600
500
400
Bids Accepted          (c)
300
200
100
Success    Ratio Achieved (c)/ (a)
60%
40%
20%
Fulfillment of Bidding Commitment
Yes
Yes
No
Fulfillment of Success Ratio
Yes
Yes
No
Success Ratio in T-Bills/CMBs is the ratio of bids    accepted to the bidding commitment.
Annex V
Format - PDR I Return
Name    of PD:
Net    Owned Funds (as per last b/s):
Return    for fortnight ending:
Amount    in Crore
date    wise fortnightly statement
1
A
Outright    purchases (Face Value)
(i) Government dated securities and T-Bills
(ii) Other securities
B
Outright sales (Face Value)
(i) Government dated securities and T-Bills
(ii) Other securities
C
Repo    transactions
i) Borrowing (amount)
- from RBI
- from the market
ii) Lending (amount)
- to RBI
- to    the market
D
Call    Money transactions
- Borrowing
- Lending
2
Outstanding    balances (Settled position figures)
A
Sources    of Funds
a)     Net Owned funds (as per last audited    balance sheet)
b)    Current year’s accruals under profit /loss account
c)    Call Money Borrowings
d)    Notice Money borrowings
e)Term    Money borrowings
f)    Borrowing from RBI under SLF
g)    Borrowing from RBI under LAF
h)    Borrowing under NCDs
i)    Repo borrowing from market
j)    Corporate bond repo borrowing
k)    Borrowing under CBLO
k)    Borrowing under credit lines of banks/FIs
m)    Borrowings through Inter-Corporate Deposits
- maturing up to 14 days
- maturing beyond 14 days
n)    FCNR(B) Loans
o)    Commercial Paper issuances
p)Bond    issuances
q)    Others (Give details for items in excess of Rs 10 cr)
Total
B
Application    of Funds
a)    Government dated securities, SDL & -Bills (Book value)@
I) Own Stock
Dated G-sec(excluding IIBs)
IIBs
SDL
91 Day  T Bills
182 Day T Bills
364 Day T Bills
CMBs
Others,    if any
II) Stock with RBI under Assured Support
III) Stock with RBI under LAF
IV) Stock with market for repo borrowing
b)    Lending in Call money Market
c)    Lending in Notice money market
d)    Lending in Term money market
e)    Repo Lending to market
f)    Lending under CBLO
g)    Repo lending to RBI
h)    Investment in Corporate Bonds
i)    Investment in shares
j)    Investment in Mutual funds schemes
- debt oriented
- equity oriented
k)    Investment in Subsidiaries.
l)    Investment in FDs
m)    Other financial assets if any (Give details for items in   excess of Rs 10 cr)
n)    Fixed Assets
o)    Others (Give details for items in excess of Rs 10 cr)
Total
Own Stock position (SGL Balance) (Face value)
i) T-Bills
ii) Dated Securities
iii)    State Development Loans (SDLs)
3
a) Portfolio duration for Securities#
b) Portfolio duration for dated G-Sec
c) VaR for the day (with    prescribed holding period of 15 days) as % of portfolio #
d) Leverage ratio (the PD as a    whole)#
@ Exclude stock received as pledge for repo    lending to RBI/market participants and also the stock reported under II, III    and IV.
# Board approved figures may be given in the  foot note.
Annex X
Reporting format for  Primary Dealers declaring dividend
Details of dividend declared during the financial  year beginning on ……..
Name of the Primary Dealer:
Accounting    Period*
Net    Profit for the accounting period (cumulative)
Rate    of Dividend (cumulative)
Amount    of Dividend (excluding dividend tax)
(cumulative)
Payout    ratio
(cumulative)
Rs. in crore
Per cent
Rs. in crore
Per cent
*- quarter or half year or year ended, as the case  may be.
Note: While  submitting the statement for the final dividend declared, details of the  interim dividends declared, if any, shall also be included in the statement.
I / We confirm that the guidelines issued by the  Reserve Bank of India for declaration of dividend have been complied with while  declaring the above mentioned dividend.
Authorised Signatory / Authorised Signatories
Name:
Designation:
Date:
Annex XI
List  of circulars consolidated
No
Circular no
Date
Subject
1
IDMC.PDRS.1532
              /03.64.00/1999-00
November    2, 1999
Primary    Dealers – Leverage
2
IDMC.PDRS.2049A
              /03.64.00/1999-2000
December    31,1999
Guidelines on Securities transactions to be    followed by Primary Dealers
3
IDMC.PDRS.5122
              /03.64.00/1999-00
June    14, 2000
Guidelines on Securities Transactions by Primary    dealers
4
IDMC.PDRS.4135
              /03.64.00/2000-01
April    19, 2001
Scheme for Bidding, Underwriting and Liquidity    support to Primary Dealers
5
IDMC.PDRS.87
              /03.64.00/2001-02
July    5, 2001
Liquidity support to Primary Dealers
6
IDMC.PDRS.1382
              /03.64.00/2000-01
September    18, 2001
Dematerialised holding of bonds and debentures
7
IDMC.PDRS.3369/03.64.00/2001-02
January    17, 2002
Guidelines on Counter party limits and Inter-corporate    deposits
8
IDMC.PDRS.4881    /03.64.00/2001-02
May    8, 2002
Guidelines to Primary Dealers
9
IDMC.PDRS.5018/03.64.00/2001-02
May    17, 2002
Scheme for Bidding, Underwriting and liquidity    support to Primary dealers
10
IDMC.PDRS.5039/03.64.00/2001-02
May    20, 2002
Transactions in Government securities
11
IDMC.PDRS.5323/03.64.00/2001-02
June    10, 2002
Transactions in Government securities
12
IDMC.PDRS.    418/03.64.00/2002-03
July    26, 2002
Publication of Financial results
13
IDMC.PDRS.1724/03.64.00/2002-03
October    23, 2002
Underwriting of Government dated securities by    Primary Dealers
14
IDMC.PDRS.2269/03.64.00/2002-03
November    28, 2002
Publication of Financial results
15
IDMC.PDRS.2896/03.64.00/2002-03
January    14, 2003
Trading in Government securities on Stock    Exchanges
16
IDMC.PDRS.3432/03.64.00/2002-03
February    21, 2003
Ready Forward Contracts
17
IDMC.PDRS.3820/03.64.00/2002-03
March    24, 2003
Availment of FCNR(B) loans by Primary Dealers
18
IDMC.PDRS.1/03.64.00/2002-03
April    10, 2003
Portfolio Management Services by Primary Dealers    – Guidelines
19
IDMC.PDRS.4802 /03.64.00/2002-03
June    3, 2003
Guidelines on Exchange Traded Interest Rate    Derivatives
20
IDMC.PDRS.122    /03.64.00/2002-03
September    22, 2003
Rationalisation of returns submitted by Primary    Dealers
21
IDMD.PDRS.No.3 /03.64.00/2003-04
March    08, 2004
Prudential guidelines on investment in    non-Government securities
22
IDMD.PDRS.05 /10.02.01/2003-04
March    29, 2004
Transactions in Government Securities
23
IDMD.PDRS.06 /03.64.00/2003-04
June    03, 2004
Declaration of dividend by Primary Dealers
24
IDMD.PDRS.01 /10.02.01/2004-05
July    23, 2004
Transactions in Government securities
25
IDMD.PDRS.02 /03.64.00/2004-05
July    23, 2004
Success Ratio in Treasury Bill auctions for Primary Dealers
26
RBI/2004-05/136 –
IDMD.PDRS.No.03 /10.02.16/2004-05
August    24, 2004
Dematerialization of Primary Dealer’s investment in    equity
27
RBI/2005/459 IDMD.PDRS.4783    /10.02.01/2004-05
May    11, 2005
Government Securities Transactions – T+1 settlement
28
RBI/2005/460 IDMD.PDRS.4779    /10.02.01/2004-05
May    11, 2005
Ready Forward Contracts
29
RBI/2005/474/
IDMD.PDRS/4907/03.64.00/2004-05
May    19, 2005
Conduct of Dated Government Securities Auction under    Primary Market Operations (PMO) module of PDO-NDS – Payment of Underwriting    Commission
30
RBI/2005-06/ 73
IDMD.PDRS. 337    /10.02.01/2005-06
July    20, 2005
Transactions in    Government Securities
31
RBI/2005-06/132
IDMD.No.766/10.26.65A/2005-06
August    22, 2005
NDS-OM – Counterparty    Confirmation
32
RBI/2005-06/308    DBOD.FSD.BC.No.64/24.92.01/2005-06
February    27, 2006
Guidelines for banks’    undertaking PD business
33
RBI/2006-07/49
IDMD.PDRS/26/03.64.00/2006-07
July    4, 2006
Diversification of activities by standalone Primary    Dealers-Operational Guidelines
34
RBI/2006-2007/298 FMD.MOAG No.13    /01.01.01/2006-07
March    30, 2007
Liquidity Adjustment    Facility – Acceptance of State Development Loans under Repos
35
RBI/2007-08/104    IDMD.530/03.64.00/2007-08
July    31, 2007
FIMMDA Reporting Platform for Corporate Bond    Transactions
36
DBOD.FSD.BC.No. 25/24.92.001    /2006-07
August    9, 2006
Guidelines for banks undertaking PD business
37
RBI/2006-07/140 IDMD.PDRS.1431    /03.64.00/2006-07
October    5, 2006
Operational guidelines for banks    undertaking/proposing to undertake PD business
38
IDMD/11.08.15/809 /2007-08
August    23, 2007
Reporting platform for OTC Interest Rate Derivatives
39
RBI/2007-2008/186    IDMD.PDRS.No.2382/03.64.00/2007-08
November    14, 2007
Revised Scheme of Underwriting Commitment and    Liquidity Support
40
RBI/2008-09/187 IDMD.PDRD.1393 /    03.64.00/ 2008-09
September    19, 2008
Settlement of Primary Auctions – Shortage of Funds
41
RBI/2009-10/136 IDMD.PDRD.1050/    03.64.00/2009-10
August    31, 2009
Investment Portfolio of Primary Dealers-Relaxation in the    existing norms
42
RBI/2009-10/144 IDMD.PDRD.1097    /03.64.00/2009-10
September    2, 2009
Enhancement of Minimum Net Owned Funds
43
RBI/2009-10/143 IDMD.PDRD.1096/03.64.00/2009-10
September    2, 2009
Increase in Call/Notice Money Borrowing Limit
44
RBI/2009-10/242 IDMD.PDRD.2424/03.64.00/2009-10
December    1, 2009
Waiver of trade confirmation in Government Securities    transactions in OTC market
45
RBI/2009-10/343 IDMD.PDRD.3843    /03.64.00/2009-10
March    9, 2010
Extension of HTM Category for PDs
46
RBI/2009-10/394 IDMD.PDRD.4537/03.64.00/2009-10
April 12, 2010
Quantum of Government securities to be held in the HTM    category by PDs
47
RBI /2009-10 /496 IDMD.PDRD.5533/03.64.00/2009-10
June 15,    2010
Primary Dealers – Imposition of Penalties – Disclosure
48
RBI/2009-10 / 497 IDMD.PDRD.5573    /03.64.00/2009-10
June 17,    2010
Cash Management Bills – Bidding Commitment and Success    Ratio
49
RBI / 2010 -11/142 IDMD.PDRD.No.19    /03.64.00/2010-11
July 27,    2010
Applicability of Non-Banking Financial (Non-Deposit    Accepting or Holding) Companies Prudential Norms (Reserve Bank) Directions,    2007 to Primary Dealers
50
RBI/2010-11/224 IDMD.PCD.No. 20/14.03.05/2010-11
October 1,    2010
Raising resources    through Inter Corporate Deposits (ICDs)
51
RBI/2010-11/270 IDMD. PCD.No.1652    /14.03.05/2010-11
November 11, 2010
Exposure Norms: Applicability of    Non-Banking Financial (Non-Deposit Accepting or Holding) Companies Prudential    Norms (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2007 to standalone Primary Dealers
52
RBI/2010-11/401 IDMD. PCD.No. 26    /14.03.05/2010-11
February 10,    2011
Investment in non-Government Securities- Non-Convertible    Debentures (NCDs) of maturity up to one year by standalone Primary Dealers    (PDs).
53
RBI/2010-11/438 IDMD.PDRD.No.    3961/03.64.00/ 2010-11
March 18, 2011
FIMMDA accredited brokers for    transactions in OTC Interest Rate Derivatives Market.
54
RBI/2011-12/162 IDMD.PCD. 9    /14.03.05/2011-12
August 30, 2011
Authorisation Guidelines for Primary Dealers (PDs)
55
RBI/2010-11/542 IDMD.PCD.No.    5053/14.03.04/2010-11
May 23, 2011
Guidelines on    Credit Default Swaps (CDS) for Corporate Bonds
56
RBI/2011-12/108    IDMD.PCD.06/14.03.07/2011-12
July 06,    2011
Transactions in    Government Securities-Extension of DVP III facility to Gilt Account holders
57
IDMD.PDRD.No. 3464/06.64.00/2011-12
March 07,    2012
Bidding in Primary    Auctions-Clarification
58
RBI/2011-12/157/IDMD.PCD.08/14.03.03/2011-12
August 23,    2011
Issuance of Non    -Convertible Debentures (NCDs)-Minimum Rating of NCDs
59
RBI/2011-12/162/IDMD.PCD.9/14.03.05/2011-12
August 30,    2011
Authorisation    Guidelines for Primary Dealers (PDs)
60
RBI/2011-12/324/IDMD.PCD.14/14.03.07/2011-12
December 28,    2011
Secondary market    transactions in Government Securities-Short Selling
61
RBI/2011-12/330/IDMD.PCD.17/14.03.01/2011-12
December 30,    2011
Exchange-traded    Interest Rate Futures
62
IDMD.PCD.15/ED (RG)-2011
December 30,    2011
Interest Rate Futures (Reserve Bank) (Amendment)    Directions, 2011
63
RBI/2011-12/387/IDMD.PCD.19/14.03.07/2011-12
February 06,    2012
Transactions in    Government Securities
64
RBI/2011-12/615/IDMD.PCD.21/14.03.07/2011-12
June 21,    2012
Secondary market transactions in Government    Securities-Short Selling
65
RBI/2012-13/133/IDMD.PDRD.188/03.64.00/2012-13
July 16,    2012
Sale of securities allotted in Primary issues on the same    day
66
RBI/2012-13/189/    IDMD.PCD.No.718/14.03.05/2012-13
September    3, 2012
Applicability of credit exposure norms for bonds guaranteed    by the Government of India
67
RBI/2012-13/412/    IDMD.PCD.No.2310 /14.03.05/2012-13
February 06, 2013
Permission to standalone PDs for membership in SEBI    approved Stock Exchanges for trading in corporate bonds
68
RBI/2012-13/494/    IDMD.PDRD.No. 3089/ 03.64.027/ 2012-13
May 08, 2013
Submission of Undertaking: Renewal of Authorisation
69
RBI/2012-13/549 IDMD.PCD.13/14.03.07/2012-13
June 26, 2013
Guidelines on Securities Transactions to be    followed by Primary Dealers
70
RBI/2013-14/168
IDMD.PDRD.No.    346 / 10.02.23 / 2013-14
July 31,    2013
Revised PD returns for Primary Dealers
71
RBI/2013-14/243
IDMD.PDRD.No.    828/ 03.64.00 / 2013-14
September    10, 2013
Increase in HTTM limits for Standalone PDs
72
RBI/2013-14/541
IDMD.PCD.    12/14.03.05/ 2013-14
March 27,    2014
Exposure norms for standalone PDs
73
RBI/2013-14/630
IDMD.PDRD.No.    3404/03.64.000/2013-14
June 5, 2014
Annual Turnover Target on behalf of Mid-segment and Retail    investors for Primary Dealers (PDs)
70
IDMD Mailbox
January 19,    2012
Maintenance of Distinct PD Book
71
IDMD Mailbox
February 06,    2012
Secondary Market Transactions in Government    Securities-Short Selling
72
IDMD Mailbox
February 28,    2012
Investment in Cash Management Bills by Foreign    Institutional Investors
Annex XII
List of circulars  referred
Sr. No.
Circular no.
Date
Subject
1
IDMC No.PDRS./2049A/03.64.00/ 99-2000
December 31, 1999
Guidelines on Securities    Transactions to be followed by Primary Dealers
2
RBI/2004/51DNBS (PD)C.C.No. 35 / 10.24 / 2003-04
February 10, 2004
Entry of NBFCs into    Insurance Business
3
RBI/2005/461 IDMD.PDRS.4777/10.02.01/2004-05
May 11, 2005
Sale of securities allotted in Primary issues
4
RBI-2005-06/352 DNBS(PD). CC 68 /03.10.042/2005-06
April 5, 2006
Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 - Obligations    of NBFCs in terms of Rules notified there under
5
RBI/2006-07/178 IDMD.No.2130/11.01.01(D)/2006-07
November 16, 2006
When Issued (WI)’ transactions in Central    Government Securities
6
RBI/2006-07/243 IDMD.No./11.01.01(B)/2006-07
January 31, 2007
Secondary Market Transactions in Government Securities    - Short-selling
7
RBI/2006-2007/333 DBOD.No.BP.BC. 86/21.04.157/2006-07
April 20, 2007
Comprehensive Guidelines on Derivatives
8
RBI/2006-2007/385 DNBS.PD/CC 94/03.10.042/2006-07
May 8, 2007
Guidelines on Corporate Governance
9
RBI/2007-2008/104 IDMD. 530 /03.64.00/ 2007-08
July 31, 2007
FIMMDA Reporting Platform for Corporate Bond    Transactions
10
RBI/2007-08/335 IDMD.DOD.No. 5893 /10.25.66/ 2007-08
May 27, 2008
NDS – Order Matching (OM) System – Access through the    CSGL Route
11
RBI/2008-09/479 IDMD.No.5877/08.02.33/2008-09
May 22, 2009
Auction Process of Government of India Securities
12
RBI/2009-10/141 IDMD.PDRD.No. 1056/03.64.00/2009-10
September 1, 2009
Guidelines on Exchange    Traded Interest Rate Derivatives
13
RBI/2009-10/184 IDMD No.1764 /11.08.38/2009-10
October    16, 2009
Settlement of OTC    transactions in corporate bonds on DvP-I basis
14
RBI/2009-10/284 IDMD.DOD.No.05/11.08.38/2009-10
January 8, 2010
Ready Forward Contracts in Corporate Debt Securities
15
RBI/2009-10/356 IDMD/4135/11.08.43/2009-10
March 23, 2010
Guidelines for Accounting of Repo / Reverse Repo Transactions
16
RBI/2009-10/360 DMD.DOD.no.7/11.01.09/2009-10
March 25, 2010
Guidelines on Stripping/Reconstitution of Government    Securities
17
RBI/2009-10/505 IDMD.DOD.10/11.01.01(A)/2009-10
June 23, 2010
Issuance of Non-Convertible Debentures (NCDs)
18
RBI/2010-2011/115 IDMD. DOD.17/11.01.01(B)/2010-11
July 14, 2010
Government Securities Act, 2006, Sections 27 & 30 -    Imposition of penalty for bouncing of SGL forms
19
RBI/2010-11/268 IDMD.PCD.22/11.08.38/2010-11
November 9, 2010
Ready Forward Contracts in Corporate Debt Securities
20
RBI/2010-11/299 IDMD.PCD.No. 24/14.03.03/2010-11
December 06, 2010
Issuance of Non-Convertible Debentures (NCDs)
21
RBI/2011-12/324 IDMD.PCD.14/14.03.07/2011-12
December    28, 2011
Secondary Market    transactions in Government Securities- Short selling
22
RBI/2010-11/542 IDMD.PCD.No. 5053/14.03.04/2010-11
May 23, 2011
Guidelines on Credit    Default Swaps (CDS) for Corporate Bonds
23
RBI/2011-12/157/IDMD.PCD.08/14.03.03/2011-12
August    23, 2011
Issuance of Non    -Convertible Debentures (NCDs)-Minimum Rating of NCDs
24
RBI/2011-12/162/IDMD.PCD.9/14.03.05/2011-12
August    30, 2011
Authorisation Guidelines    for Primary Dealers (PDs)
25
RBI/2011-12/324/IDMD.PCD.14/14.03.07/2011-12
December    28, 2011
Secondary market    transactions in Government Securities-Short Selling
26
RBI/2011-12/330/IDMD.PCD.17/14.03.01/2011-12
December    30, 2011
Exchange-traded Interest    Rate Futures
27
IDMD.PDRD.No.    3464/06.64.00/2011-12
March 07, 2012
Bidding in Primary    Auctions-Clarification
28
RBI/2011-12/615/IDMD.PCD.21/14.03.07/2011-12
June    21, 2012
Secondary market    transactions in Government Securities-Short Selling
29
RBI/2012-13/365/ IDMD.PCD.09/14.03.02/2012-13
January    7, 2013
Revised Guidelines on    Ready Forward Contracts in Corporate Debt Securities
30
RBI/2012-13/366/ IDMD.PCD.10/14.03.04/2012-13
January    7, 2013
Revised Guidelines on    Credit Default Swaps (CDS) for Corporate Bonds
31
RBI/2012-13/405/ IDMD. PCD.No.2223/ 14.03.05 /2012-13
January    30, 2013
Measures to enhance the    role of standalone Primary Dealers in Corporate Bond Market
32
RBI/2012-13/550 IDMD.PCD.11 /14.03.06/2012-13
June 26, 2013
Settlement of OTC transactions in Corporate    Bonds on DvP-I basis
33
RBI/2013-14/400    FMD.MSRG.No. 94 /02.05.002/2013-14
December 4, 2013
Reporting    platform for OTC foreign exchange and Interest Rate Derivatives
34
RBI/2013-14/402
IDMD.PCD.    08/14.03.01/2013-14
December 5, 2013
Exchange-Traded    Interest Rate Futures
35
RBI/2013-14/410
IDMD.PCD.09    /14.03.01/2013-14
December 19, 2013
Participation    in Exchange Traded Interest Rate Futures
34
RBI/2013-14/500
IDMD.PCD.10    /14.03.06/ 2013-14
February 24, 2014
FIMMDA’s    Trade Reporting and Confirmation platform for OTC transactions in Corporate    Bonds and Securitized Debt Instruments
1
In terms of the  explanatory note to Section 45-IA of Chapter III-B of the RBI Act, 1934, NOF is  calculated as (a) the aggregate of the paid-up equity capital and free reserves  as disclosed in the latest balance-sheet of the company after deducting there  from– (i) accumulated balance of loss; (ii) deferred revenue expenditure; and  (iii) other intangible assets; and (b) further reduced by the amounts  representing – (1) investments of such company in shares of – (i) its  subsidiaries; (ii) companies in the same group; (iii) all other non-banking  financial companies; and (2) the book value of debentures, bonds, outstanding  loans and advances (including hire-purchase and lease finance) made to, and  deposits with,– (i) subsidiaries of such company; and (ii) companies in the  same group, to the extent such amount exceeds ten per cent of (a) above.