(941 kb)
Master Circular – Lead Bank Scheme
RBI/2014-15/94
RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No. 9/02.01.001/2014-15
July 1, 2014
The Chairmen and Managing  Directors
SLBC Convenor Banks/Lead Banks
Dear Sir/Madam
MASTER CIRCULAR – Lead  Bank Scheme
The Reserve Bank of  India has issued guidelines on Lead Bank Scheme from time to time. This
Master Circular
consolidates the relevant guidelines issued by Reserve Bank of India on  Lead Bank Scheme up to June 30, 2014 as listed in the
Appendix
.
2. This Master Circular has  been placed on the RBI website
http://www.rbi.org.in
Yours faithfully,
(A. Udgata)
Principal Chief  General Manager
Encl: As above
Structure
1
Introduction
2
Service    Area Approach
3
Lead    Bank Responsibility
A -    Assignment of lead bank responsibility
B    - Assignment of lead bank responsibility in districts of metropolitan areas
4
Implementation    of Lead Bank Scheme
A    - Preparation of credit plans
B - Potential    Linked Credit Plans (PLPs)
C    - Monitoring the performance of credit plans
5
Block Level Bankers’ Committee (BLBC)
6
District    Consultative Committee (DCC)
A - Constitution    of DCC
B    - Conduct of DCC Meetings
C - Agenda for DCC Meetings
D    - Role of LDMs
E    - Quarterly Public Meeting and Grievance Redressal
F    - District Level Review Committee (DLRC) Meetings
G    - DCC/DLRC meetings – Annual Calendar of Meetings
7
State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC)
A    - Constitution of SLBC
B    - Conduct of SLBC Meetings
C    - Agenda for SLBC Meetings
D    - Banking Penetration
E    - SLBC – Yearly Calendar of Meetings
F    - SLBC Website – Standardisation of information/data
G    - Liaison with State Government
H    - Capacity Building/Training/Sensitization Programmes
8
Roadmap    for opening of banking outlets in unbanked villages
9
Direct    Benefit Transfer
10
Credit    Deposit Ratio
A    - CD ratio of banks in Rural and Semi-Urban Areas
B    - Implementation of the recommendations of Expert Group on CD ratio
11
Monitoring    of LBS by RBI- Monitoring Information System (MIS)
12
Monitoring    of Financial Inclusion Plans (FIP) – State and District Level
13
Monitoring    of Roadmap for providing banking    Services in unbanked villages  with    population below 2000
1. Introduction
(i) The genesis of Lead Bank Scheme (LBS) can be  traced to the Study Group headed by Prof. D. R. Gadgil (Gadgil Study Group) on  the organisational framework for implementation of the social objectives, which  submitted its report in October 1969. The Study Group drew attention to the  fact that commercial banks did not have adequate presence in rural areas and  also lacked the required rural orientation. The Study Group, therefore,  recommended the adoption of an 'Area Approach' to evolve plans and programmes  for the development of an adequate banking and credit structure in the rural  areas.
(ii) A Committee of Bankers on Branch Expansion  Programme of public sector banks appointed by Reserve Bank of India under the  Chairmanship of Shri F. K. F. Nariman (Nariman Committee) endorsed the idea of  area approach in its report (November 1969) recommending that in order to  enable the public sector banks to discharge their social responsibilities, each  bank should concentrate on certain districts where it should act as a 'Lead  Bank'.
(iii) Pursuant to the above recommendations, the  Lead Bank Scheme was introduced by Reserve Bank of India in December 1969. The Scheme aims at coordinating the  activities of banks and other developmental agencies through various fora in  order to achieve the objective of enhancing the flow of bank finance to  priority sector and other sectors and to promote banks' role in overall  development of the rural sector. For  coordinating the activities in the district, a particular bank is assigned the  lead bank responsibility of the district. The lead bank is expected to assume  leadership role for coordinating the efforts of the credit institutions and  Government.
(iv) In view of the number of changes that had taken  place in the financial sector, the Lead Bank Scheme was last reviewed by the  High Level Committee of the Reserve Bank of India in 2009.
(v) The High Level Committee held wide ranging discussions with various stakeholders viz. State  Governments, banks, development institutions, academicians, NGOs, MIFIs etc.  and noted that the Scheme has been useful in achieving its original objectives  of improvement in branch expansion, deposit mobilisation and lending to the  priority sectors, especially in rural/semi urban areas. There  was overwhelming consensus that the Scheme needs to continue. Based on the recommendations of the Committee,  guidelines were issued to SLBC convenor banks and lead banks for implementation.
(vi) Envisaging greater role for  private sector banks, the lead banks were advised to ensure that private sector  banks are more closely involved in the implementation of the Lead Bank Scheme.  The private sector banks should involve themselves more actively by leveraging  on Information Technology bringing in their expertise in strategic planning.  They should also involve themselves in the preparation as well as implementation  of the District Credit Plan.
2. Service Area Approach (SAA)
i) The Service Area  Approach (SAA) introduced in April 1989 for planned and orderly development of  rural and semi-urban areas was applicable to all scheduled commercial banks  including Regional Rural Banks. Under  SAA, each bank branch in rural and semi-urban area was designated to serve an  area of 15 to 25 villages and the branch was responsible for meeting the needs  of bank credit of its service area. The  primary objective of SAA was to increase productive lending and forge effective  linkages between bank credit, production, productivity and increase in income  levels. The SAA scheme was reviewed from  time to time and appropriate changes were made in the scheme to make it more  effective.
ii) The Service Area  Approach scheme was last reviewed in December 2004 and it was decided to dispense  with the restrictive provisions of the scheme while retaining the positive features  of the SAA such as credit planning and monitoring of the credit purveyance. Accordingly,  under SAA the allocation of villages among the rural and semi-urban branches of  banks were made not applicable for lending except under Government Sponsored schemes. Thus, while the commercial banks and RRBs are  free to lend in any rural and semi-urban area, the borrowers have the choice of  approaching any branch for their credit requirements. Therefore, the requirement of obtaining ‘no  due certificate’ from the service area branch for lending by non-service area  branch has been dispensed with. However,  banks at their discretion may take steps considered necessary to avoid multiple  financing. As the restrictive provisions  of the service area have been removed in December 2004, the Service Area  Approach is applicable only for Government Sponsored programmes.
3. Lead Bank Responsibility
A. Assignment of Lead Bank Responsibility
i) Lead Bank Scheme is  administered by the Reserve Bank of India since 1969. The assignment of lead  bank responsibility to designated banks in every district is done by Reserve  Bank of India following a detailed procedure formulated for this purpose. As on  June 30, 2014, 25  public sector banks and one private sector bank have been assigned lead bank  responsibility in 671 districts of the country.
ii) State Level  Bankers’ Committee (SLBC)/Union Territory Level Bankers' Committee (UTLBC) as  an apex level forum at State/Union Territory (UT) level coordinates the  activities of the financial institutions and Government departments in the  State/Union Territory under the Lead Bank Scheme. SLBC Convenorship is assigned  to banks for this purpose. As on June 30, 2014, the SLBC/UTLBC convenorship  of 29 States and 7 Union Territories has been assigned to  16 public sector banks and one private sector bank. List of State wise SLBC convenor banks and district  wise lead banks is given in
Annex I
.
B. Assignment of lead  bank responsibility in districts of metropolitan areas
The Lead Bank Scheme  (LBS) was applicable to all districts in the country except districts in  metropolitan areas. Metropolitan areas were kept out of the Lead Bank Scheme as  the reach of banking network  in metropolitan areas was quite high in comparison to rural and semi-urban  areas in the country. In view of the wide  spread challenge of financial exclusion in metropolitan areas, especially among  the disadvantaged and low-income groups and to facilitate doorstep banking to  the excluded segment of the urban poor and to provide an institutional  mechanism for co-ordination between the government and banks, it was decided to  bring all districts in metropolitan areas under the LBS. Accordingly, the 16  districts in metropolitan areas of Chennai (1), Delhi (11), Hyderabad (1),  Kolkata(1) Mumbai (2), were assigned lead bank responsibility and thus brought  under the lead bank scheme during 2013-14. Thus, at present, the entire country is now under the fold of the Lead Bank  Scheme.
4. Implementation of Lead Bank Scheme
A. Preparation of credit plans
Planning plays an  important role in the implementation of the Lead Bank Scheme and a bottom-up  approach is adopted to map the existing potential for development. Under LBS, planning starts with identifying  block wise/activity wise potential estimated for various sectors.
B. Potential Linked Credit Plans (PLPs)
i) Potential Linked  Credit Plans (PLPs) are a step towards decentralized credit planning with the  basic objective of mapping the existing potential for development through bank  credit. PLPs take into account the long term physical potential, availability  of infrastructure support, marketing facilities, and policies/programmes of  Government etc.
ii) A  pre-PLP meeting is convened by LDM during June every year to be attended by the  banks, Government agencies, etc., to reflect their views and concerns regarding  credit potential (sector/activity-wise) and deliberate on major financial and  socio-economic developments in the district in the last one year and priorities  to be set out for inclusion in the PLP.  DDM of NABARD will make a presentation in this meeting outlining the  major requirements of information for preparing the PLP for the following year.  The preparation of PLP for the next year is to  be completed by August every year to enable the State Government to factor in  the PLP projections.
iii) The  procedure for preparing the District Credit Plan is as follows:
a) Controlling Offices of commercial  banks and Head Office of RRB and DCCB/LDB will circulate the accepted  block-wise/activity-wise potential to all their branches for preparing the  Branch Credit Plans (BCP) by their respective branch managers. Banks should ensure that the exercise of preparation of branch/block  plans is completed in time by all branches so that the Credit Plans become  operational on time.
b) A special Block Level  Bankers' Committee (BLBC) meeting will be convened for each block where the  Branch Credit Plans will be discussed and aggregated to form the Block Credit  Plan. DDM and LDM will guide the BLBC in  finalizing the plan ensuring that the Block Credit Plan is in tune with the  potentials identified activity-wise including in respect of Government sponsored  programmes.
c) All the Block Credit  Plans of the district will be aggregated by LDM to form the District Credit  Plan. This plan indicates an analytical assessment of the  credit need of the district to be deployed by all the financial institutions operating  in the district and total quantum of funds to be earmarked as credit by all the  financial institutions for a new financial year. The Zonal/Controlling Offices of banks, while  finalizing their business plans for the year, should take into account the  commitments made in the DCP which should be ready well in time before the  performance budgets are finalized.
d) The District Credit Plan  will be placed before the DCC by the Lead District Manager for final  acceptance/approval. All the District Credit  Plans would eventually be aggregated into State Level Credit Plan to be  prepared by SLBC convenor bank and launched by 1st of April every year.
C. Monitoring the performance of credit plans
The performance of  the credit plans is reviewed in the various fora created under the lead bank scheme as  shown below:
At Block Level
Block Level Bankers’    Committee (BLBC)
At District Level
District Consultative Committee (DCC) &    District Level Review Committee (DLRC)
At State Level
State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC)
5. Block Level Bankers’ Committee (BLBC)
BLBC  is a forum for achieving  coordination between credit institutions on one hand and field level  development agencies on the other. The forum prepares  and reviews implementation of Block Credit Plan and also resolves operational  problems in implementation of the credit programmes of banks. Lead District  Manager of the district is the Chairman of the Block Level Bankers’ Committee. All  the banks operating in the block including the district central co-operative  banks and RRB, Block Development Officer, technical officers in the block, such  as extension officers for agriculture, industries and co-operatives are members  of the Committee. BLBC meetings are held at quarterly intervals. The LDO of RBI  and the DDM of NABARD selectively attend the meetings of the BLBCs. The  representatives of Panchayat Samitis are also invited to attend the meetings at  half yearly intervals so as to share their knowledge and experience on rural  development in the credit planning exercise.
6. District Consultative Committee (DCC)
A.
Constitution  of DCC
DCCs were  constituted in 1970s as a common forum  at district level for bankers as well as Government agencies/departments  towards coordination of activities in  implementing various schemes under Lead Bank Scheme. The District Collector is the Chairman of the  DCC meetings. Reserve Bank of India, NABARD, all the commercial banks in the  district, co-operative banks including District Central Cooperative Bank (DCCB),  RRBs, various State Government departments and allied agencies are the members  of the DCC. The Lead District Officer  (LDO) represents the Reserve Bank as a member of the DCC. The Lead District Manager convenes the DCC  meetings. The Director of Micro Small and Medium Enterprises Development  Institutes (MSME-DI) is an invitee in districts where MSME clusters are located  to discuss issues concerning MSMEs.
B. Conduct of DCC Meetings
DCC  meeting should be convened by the lead banks at quarterly intervals.
At the DCC level, sub-committees as  appropriate may be set up to work intensively on specific issues and submit  reports to the DCC for its consideration.
DCC should give adequate feedback to the SLBC  on various issues that needs to be discussed on a wider platform, so that these  receive adequate attention at the State Level.
C. Agenda for DCC Meetings
While all lead banks are expected to address the problems particular to  the concerned districts, some of the important areas which are common to all  districts which the lead banks should invariably discuss in the fora are as  under:
monitoring  mechanism to periodically assess and evaluate the progress made in achieving  the road map to provide banking services within the prescribed time frame. Prepare  district wise Financial Inclusion Plan (FIP) for the three year period in the  format LBS-MIS-IV for a district. The  progress under FIP should be reviewed in the format LBS-MIS-V for quarterly  submission to SLBC.
the  specific issues inhibiting and enabling IT enabled financial inclusion
issues  to facilitate 'enablers' and remove/minimise 'impeders' for banking development  for inclusive growth
monitoring initiatives for providing  'Credit Plus' activities by banks and State Governments such as setting up of Financial  Literacy Centres (FLCs) and RSETI type  Training Institutes for providing skills and capacity building to manage  businesses.
scaling up financial literacy efforts to  achieve financial inclusion.
review of performance of banks under District  Credit Plan (DCP)
flow of credit to priority sector and  weaker sections of the society
assistance under Government sponsored  schemes
grant  of educational loans
progress  under SHG - bank linkage
SME  financing & bottlenecks thereof, if any
timely submission of data by banks
review of  relief measures (in case of natural calamities wherever applicable)
The above list is illustrative and not exhaustive. The lead banks may  include any other agenda item considered necessary.
D. Role of LDMs
As the effectiveness of the Lead Bank Scheme depends on the dynamism of  the District Collectors and the Lead District Managers (LDMs), with supportive  role of the Regional/Zonal Office, the office of LDM should be sufficiently  strengthened with appropriate infrastructural support being the focal point for  successful implementation of the Lead Bank Scheme. Officers of appropriate  level and attitude should be posted as LDMs. Apart from the usual role of LDMs  like convening meetings of the DCC/DLRC and periodical meetings of DDM/LDO/  Government officials for resolving outstanding issues etc., the new functions  envisaged for LDMs include the following:
Drawing  up and monitoring the road map for  banking penetration
Monitoring  implementation of district credit plan
Associate with the setting up of Financial  Literacy Centres (FLCs), RSETIs by banks
Associate  with organizing financial literacy camps by FLCs and rural branches of banks.
Holding annual  sensitisation workshops for banks and Government officials with participation  by NGOs/Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs)
Arranging for  quarterly awareness and feedback public meetings, grievance redressal etc.
E. Quarterly Public Meeting and Grievance  Redressal
The Lead District Manager should convene a quarterly public meeting at  various locations in the district in coordination with the LDO of Reserve Bank,  banks having presence in the area and other stakeholders to generate awareness  of the various banking policies and regulations relating to the common person,  obtain feedback from the public and provide grievance redressal to the extent  possible at such meetings or facilitate approaching the appropriate machinery  for such redressal.
F. District Level Review Committee (DLRC) Meetings
DLRC meetings are Chaired  by the District Collector and attended by members of the District Consultative  Committee (DCC). Besides above, public  representatives i.e. Local MPs/MLAs/ Zilla  Parishad Chiefs are also invited to these  meetings. In DLRC meetings review of the programmes under Lead Bank Scheme is  carried out by getting feedback to know the pace and quality of the implementation of various programmes  in the district. Hence association of non officials is considered useful. Lead banks are required to ensure the  presence of public representatives in  DLRC meetings as far as possible. Therefore, Lead banks should fix the date of  DLRC meetings with due regard to the convenience of the representatives of the  public i.e. MPs/MLAs etc. and invite and involve them in all functions  conducted by the banks in the districts, such as opening of new branches,  distribution of Kisan Credit Cards, SHG credit linkage programmes etc. Responses  to queries from public representatives need to be accorded highest priority and  attended to promptly. The follow up of DLRC’s decisions is required to be  discussed in the DCC meetings.
G. DCC/DLRC meetings- Annual Calendar of Meetings
i) DCC and DLRC are the  important coordinating fora among commercial banks, Government agencies and  others at district level to review and find solutions to the problems hindering  the developmental activities. Therefore, it is necessary that all the members  participate and deliberate in the above meetings. On a review of the DCC/DLRC  meetings, it was observed that late receipt/non-receipt of intimation of the  date of meetings, clash of dates with other events, commonality of dates  etc. hinder participation of members in  these meetings, thus undermining the prime objective of conducting the above  meetings.
ii) Lead  banks have, therefore, been advised to prepare annual schedule of DCC and DLRC  meetings on Calendar year basis for all districts in consultation with the  Chairperson of the meetings, lead district officer of RBI and Public  Representatives in case of DLRC. This  yearly Calendar should be prepared in the beginning of each year and circulated  to all members as advance intimation for blocking future dates to attend the  DCC and DLRC meetings and the meetings should be conducted as per the  calendar. While preparing the Calendar, it should be seen that DCC and DLRC meetings  are
not
held simultaneously.
7. State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC)
A. Constitution of  SLBC
i) The State Level  Bankers’ Committee (SLBC) has been constituted in April 1977, as an apex inter-institutional forum to create adequate  coordination machinery in all States, on a uniform basis for development of the  State. SLBC is Chaired by the Chairman & Managing Director (CMD) of the convenor  bank/Executive Director of the convenor bank. It  comprises representatives of commercial banks, RRBs, State Cooperative Banks,  RBI, NABARD, heads of Government departments including representatives from  National Commission for Scheduled Castes/Tribes, National Horticulture Board,  Khadi & Village Industries Commission etc. and representatives of financial  institutions operating in a State, who come together and sort out coordination  problems at the policy implementation level.  Representatives of various organizations from different sectors of the  economy like retail traders, exporters and farmers’ union etc. are special  invitees in SLBC meetings for discussing their specific problems, if any. The  SLBC meetings are held on quarterly basis. The responsibility of convening the  meetings of the SLBC would be that of the SLBC convenor bank of the State.
ii) Recognising that  SLBCs, primarily as a committee of bankers at State level play an important  role in the development of the State, illustrative guidelines on the conduct of  State Level Bankers Committee (SLBC) meetings have been issued.
B. Conduct of SLBC Meetings
i) The SLBC meetings are required to be held regularly at quarterly  intervals. SLBC is Chaired by the  Chairman & Managing Director (CMD) of the convenor bank/Executive Director  of the convenor bank and co-chaired by  Additional Chief Secretary or Development Commissioner of the State  concerned. High Level of participation  in SLBC/UTLBC meetings ensure an effective and desired outcome with meaningful  discussion on issues of public policy of both the Government of India and  Reserve Bank of India.
ii) The Chief Minister/Finance  Minister and senior level officers of the State/RBI (of the rank of Deputy  Governor / Executive Director) may be invited to attend the SLBC meetings. Further, the State Chief Ministers are encouraged  to attend at least one SLBC meeting in a year.
iii) In view of the large membership of the SLBC, it would be desirable  for the SLBC to constitute Steering Sub Committee/Sub-Committees for specific  tasks like agriculture, micro, small/medium industries/enterprises, handloom  finance, export promotion and financial inclusion etc. The sub committees may  examine the specific issues in-depth and devise solutions/recommendations for adoption  by the full committee. It is expected to meet more frequently than the SLBC. The  composition of the sub-committee and subjects/ specific issues  impeding/enabling financial inclusion to be deliberated upon, may vary from  State to State depending on the specific problems/issues faced by the States.
iv) The secretariat/offices of SLBC should be sufficiently strengthened  to enable the SLBC convenor bank to effectively discharge its functions.
v) The various fora at lower levels may give adequate feedback to the  SLBC on issues that need to be discussed on a wider platform.
vi) Several institutions and academicians are engaged in research and  studies etc. that have implications for sustainable development in agriculture  and MSME sector. Engaging with such research institutions and academicians  would be useful in bringing in new ideas for furthering the objectives of the  Lead Bank Scheme. The SLBCs may, therefore, identify such academicians and  researchers and invite them as 'special invitees' to attend SLBC meetings  occasionally both for adding value to the discussion and also associate them  with studies for product formulation appropriate to the State. Other 'special  invitees' may be invited to attend SLBC meetings depending on the agenda items/issues  to be discussed in the meetings.
vii) The activities of NGOs in facilitating and channeling credit to the  low income households are expected to increase in the coming years. Several corporate  houses are also engaged in corporate social responsibility activities for  sustainable development. Bank's linkage with such NGOs/Corporate houses  operating in the area to ensure that the NGOs/corporates provide the necessary  'credit plus' services can help leverage bank credit for inclusive growth.  Success stories could be presented in SLBC meetings to serve as models that  could be replicated.
C. Agenda for SLBC Meetings
While all SLBCs are expected to address the problems particular to the  concerned states, some of the important areas which are common to all States  which the SLBCs should invariably discuss in the fora are as under:
Financial  inclusion - monitoring mechanism to periodically assess and evaluate the  progress made in achieving the road map to provide banking services within the  time frame prescribed. Compile and consolidate State wise Financial inclusion  Plan for the three year period in the format LBS-MIS-IV. The progress under FIP should be reviewed in  the format LBS-MIS-V for quarterly submission to Reserve Bank.
The specific issues inhibiting and enabling IT  enabled financial inclusion.
Issues to facilitate 'enablers' and  remove/minimise 'impeders' for banking development for inclusive growth
Monitoring initiatives for providing 'Credit  Plus' activities by banks and State Governments such as setting up of Financial  Literacy Centres (FLCs) and RSETI type  training institutes for providing skills and capacity building to manage  businesses
Scaling  up financial literacy efforts to achieve financial inclusion.
Review of performance  of banks under Annual Credit Plan (ACP) of the State
Regional  imbalances in deployment of credit to various sectors of the economy
Credit - Deposit  Ratio of the State
Flow of credit to  priority sector and weaker sections of the society
Assistance under  Government sponsored schemes
Grant of  educational loans
Progress under SHG  - bank linkage
Discuss  the problems faced by MSME sector
Steps taken for  improving land record and recovery mechanism
Timely submission of data by banks
Review of relief  measures (in case of natural calamities wherever applicable) and
Issues  remaining unresolved at the DCC/DLRC meetings
The above list is illustrative and not exhaustive. The SLBC convenor  banks may include any other agenda item considered necessary.
D. Banking Penetration
i) Over the years, the focus of Lead Bank Scheme  has shifted to inclusive growth and financial inclusion. The use of Information  Technology (IT) and intermediaries has enabled banks to increase outreach,  scale and depth of banking services at affordable cost.
ii) SLBC convenor banks / lead banks are advised  to focus attention on the need for achieving 100% financial inclusion through  penetration of banking services in the rural areas. Such banking services may  not necessarily be extended through a brick and mortar branch but can be  provided through any of the various forms of ICT- based models, including  through BCs. However, ICT connectivity should not be an excuse for not pursuing  financial inclusion by commercial banks/RRBs.
iii) SLBC convenor banks should take up with the  State Governments impeders such as issues of road/digital connectivity,  conducive law and order situation, uninterrupted power supply and adequate  security etc. for ensuring banking expansion at all centres where penetration  by the formal banking system is required. However, these impeders should not  inhibit the scaling up of financial inclusion initiatives.
E. SLBC - Yearly Calendar of Meetings
i) To improve the effectiveness and streamlining  the functioning of SLBC/UTLBC meetings, SLBC convernor banks have been advised to  prepare a yearly calendar of programme (calendar year basis) in the beginning  of the year itself, for conducting the meetings. The calendar of programme  should clearly specify the cut off dates for data submission to SLBC and  acceptance thereof by SLBC convenor. This yearly calendar should be circulated  to all the concerned as an advance intimation for blocking of future dates of senior  functionaries of various agencies like Central  Government, State Governments, banks and RBI, etc. The SLBC/UTLBC  meetings should be conducted as per the calendar under all circumstances. The  agenda should also be circulated in advance without waiting for the data from  defaulting banks. The matter should, however, be taken up with the defaulting  banks in the SLBC meeting. In addition, SLBC convernor bank should write a  letter in this regard to the controlling office of the defaulting banks under  advice to Regional Office of RBI. SLBC convenor bank will, however, continue to  follow-up with banks for timely data submission. Further, in case the Chief  Minister, Finance Minister or other very senior functionaries are not able to  attend the SLBC on some very rare occasion, then if so desired by them, a  special SLBC meeting can be held. Following  broad guidelines should be used for preparation of the calendar of programmes:
Activity
To    be completed by (Date)
Preparation    of calendar of SLBC/UTLBC meetings and intimation to all the concerned of the    cut-off dates for submission of data and dates of meetings as per the    dateline given below.
15th January every year
Reminder    regarding the exact date of meeting and submission of data by banks to SLBC
15 days before end of the    quarter
Dead    line for receipt of information/data by SLBC convenor bank
15 days from the end of    the quarter
Distribution    of agenda cum background papers
20 days from the end of    the quarter
Holding    of the meeting
Within 45 days from the    end of the quarter
Forwarding    the minutes of the meeting to all stakeholders
Within 10 days from    holding the meeting
Follow-up of the action    points emerged from the meeting
To be completed within 30    days of forwarding the minutes (for review in the next meeting)
ii) The objective of preparing calendar of  meetings in the beginning of the year is to ensure adequate notice of these  meetings and timely compilation and dispatch of agenda papers to all stake  holders. It also ensures clear cut guidelines for submission of data to SLBC convenors  by participating banks & Government Departments. It is expected to save  precious time of SLBC convenors otherwise spent in taking dates from various  senior functionaries attending these SLBC meetings.
iii) SLBC convenor banks need to appreciate the advantages of  ensuring adherence to the yearly calendars. SLBC convenor banks have therefore been advised to give wide publicity  to the annual calendar at the beginning of the year and ensure that dates of  senior functionaries expected to attend the meetings are blocked for all  meetings by their offices. In case,  despite blocking dates, if for some reason, the senior functionary is not able  to attend the meeting, the meeting should be held as planned in the calendar. More importantly, the data for review in  these meetings should be received as per deadlines set in the calendar and  those who do not submit the data in time should be asked to explain the reasons  for delay in sending the data that may be recorded in the minutes of the  meeting. Under no circumstances preparation of agenda should be delayed beyond  stipulated dates as per calendar.
F. SLBC Website –  Standardisation of information /data
SLBC convenor banks are  required to maintain the SLBC websites where all instructions pertaining to LBS  and Government Sponsored Schemes are made available and are accessible to the  common man desiring any information relating to the conduct of meetings or  State wise data/Bank wise performance. In order to standardize the information  and data that is to be made available on SLBC website, an indicative list of  the information & data is given in the
Annex II
. SLBCs should arrange to place the prescribed  minimum information on the websites of SLBCs of their bank and keep it updated  regularly, at least on quarterly basis. Banks may note that the list is only an  indicative list and SLBCs are free to put any additional information considered  relevant for the State.
G. Liaison with State  Government
SLBC convenor banks are expected to co-ordinate the activities of  all banks in the State, discuss with the State Government officials the  operational problems in lending, extending necessary support for banking development and to achieve the  objective of financial inclusion.
H. Capacity Building/Training/Sensitization  Programmes
i) There is a need  for sensitising the District Collectors and CEOs of Zilla Parishads on banks  and banking in general as also on the specific scope and role of the Lead Bank  Scheme. In each State, a full day sensitisation workshop may be convened by the  SLBC convenor bank in April/May every year. Such sensitisation should form part  of the probationary training of such officers. Further, as soon as they are  posted in a district, the SLBC may arrange for exposure visits for the District  Collectors to the SLBC convenor’s office for sensitisation and understanding of  the Lead Bank Scheme.
ii) Staff at the  operational level of banks and government agencies associated with  implementation of the Lead Bank Scheme need to be aware of the latest  developments and emerging opportunities. There is need for staff sensitisation/  training/seminars, etc. at periodic intervals on an ongoing basis
8. Roadmap for opening of banking outlets  in unbanked villages
i)  As one of the major recommendations of the High Level Committee was the  need to achieve 100% financial inclusion through penetration of banking  services in the rural areas, a phase wise approach has been adopted to provide  door step banking facilities in all the unbanked villages in the country. In  November 2009, under Phase-I, guidelines for preparation of Roadmap for providing  banking services in villages with population more than 2000 was issued. After successful completion of Phase-I by  March 2012, a roadmap to provide banking services in unbanked  villages with less than 2,000 population has been rolled out in June 2012.
ii) Guidelines were issued to SLBC convener  banks advising them to prepare a roadmap covering all unbanked villages with  less than 2000 population for providing banking services in a time bound  manner. SLBC convenor banks have been  advised that the Roadmap for providing banking services to all the remaining  unbanked villages in the country is to be prepared and villages allocated to  banks so as to ensure that all DBT beneficiaries are covered. The objective is to provide a bank account to  every household/person throughout the country. To start with, banks have been  advised to provide door step services to DBT beneficiaries to facilitate  transfer of all State benefits including MGNREGA wages and various cash  subsidies to beneficiaries by direct credit to the bank accounts, through  regular visits of BCs to the allocated villages and over a period of time,  provide all kinds of banking services viz. remittances, recurring deposit,  entrepreneurial credit in the form of KCC and GCC, insurance (life and  non-life) and other banking services to all the residents of the village  through a mix of brick and mortar branch and BC network. The plan of coverage  under the road map for providing banking outlets in villages with population below 2000 is expected to be completed by March 2016 in all  the unbanked villages with population less than 2000. The intention of allotting the unbanked  villages, amongst various banks is to ensure that these villages are provided  with at least one banking outlet for extending banking facilities. The above initiative, however, does not deny  the opportunity for any other bank to operate in these areas and extend banking  services based on the available business potential.
9. Direct Benefit Transfer
Direct Benefit Transfer  (DBT) was rolled out by Government of India in selected districts since January  2013. SLBC convenor banks were advised  to co-ordinate with the authorities to implement DBT. Banks were advised to include the status of  the roll-out of DBT as a regular agenda item for discussion in SLBC meetings as  part of Financial Inclusion/Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) implementation. As a  prerequisite to the implementation of the DBT, every eligible individual should  have a bank account. Further, to make disbursements at the doorstep through the  ICT-based BC model, banking outlets either through brick & mortar branches  or the branchless mode is needed in all villages across the country. Hence, banks have been advised to:
take steps to complete account opening and seeding Aadhaar number in all the DBT  districts.
closely monitor the progress in seeding of  Aadhaar number in bank accounts of beneficiaries.
put in place a       system to provide acknowledgement to the beneficiary of seeding request       and also send confirmation of       seeding of Aadhaar number.
form DBT Implementation Co-ordination  Committee, along with State Government  department concerned, at district level and review the seeding of  Aadhaar number in bank accounts.
ensure that       district and village wise names and other details of business correspondents (BCs)       engaged/other arrangements made by the bank is displayed on the SLBC website.
set up a Complaint Grievance Redressal mechanism  in each bank and nominate a Complaint Redressal Officer in each district, to  redress the grievances related to ‘seeding of Aadhaar number in bank accounts'.
10. Credit  Deposit Ratio
A.
CD  ratio of banks in Rural and Semi-Urban Areas
Banks have been  advised to achieve a credit deposit ratio of 60% in respect of their rural and  semi-urban branches separately on an all-India basis. While it is not necessary  that this ratio should be achieved separately branch-wise, district-wise or  region-wise, the banks should nevertheless, ensure that wide disparity in the  ratios between different States / Regions is avoided in order to minimise  regional imbalance in credit deployment. The credit dispensation in certain  districts is very low, as a result of various factors such as lack of necessary  infra-structure, varying ability of different regions to absorb credit, etc. The  banks may review the performance of their bank branches in such areas and take  necessary steps to augment the credit flow. The lead banks may discuss the  problem in all its aspects with the other financial institutions in the  district and also in the DCC forums.
B. Implementation  of the recommendations of Expert Group on CD Ratio
i) An Expert Group was constituted by  Government of India to go into the nature and magnitude of the problem of low  credit deposit (CD) ratio across States / Regions and to suggest steps to  overcome the problem. The Expert Group examined problems and causes of low CD  ratio. As per the recommendations, the CD ratio of banks should be monitored at  different levels on the basis of the following parameters –
Institution / Level
Indicator
Individual banks at    Head Office
Cu + RIDF
State Level (SLBC)
Cu + RIDF
District Level
Cs
Where:
Cu = Credit as per place  of Utilization
Cs = Credit as per place  of Sanction
RIDF = Total Resource  support provided to States under RIDF
Further, banks are advised that:
In the districts having CD       ratio less than 40, Special Sub-Committees (SSCs) of DCC may be set up to       monitor the CD ratio.
Districts having CD ratio between 40 and 60, will be       monitored under the existing system by DCC, and
The district with CD ratio of less than 20 need to  be treated on a special footing.
ii). Special Sub- Committee (SSCs) of DCC should  be set up in the districts having CD ratio less than 40, in order to monitor  the CD ratio and to draw up Monitorable  Action Plans (MAPs) to increase the CD ratio. The Lead District Manager is  designated as the convenor of the SSC, which in addition to District  co-ordinators of banks functioning in the area, will comprise of LDO of RBI, DDM  of NABARD, District Planning Officer or a representative of the Collector duly  empowered to take decisions on behalf of the district administration.
The  functions of the Special Sub-Committee are as under:
The Special Sub-Committee (SSCs) will draw up Monitorable  Action Plans (MAPs) for improving the CD ratio in their districts on a self-set  graduated basis.
For this purpose the SSC will hold a special meeting  immediately after its constitution and on the basis of the various ground level  parameters, set for itself a target for increasing the CD ratio initially for  the current year. It will also, at the same meeting, set a definite time frame  for the CDR beyond 60 in annual increments.
Consequent on the completion of this process, the target  and time frame self set by the SSC will be placed before the DCC for approval.
Take up the plans for implementation and monitor the same  assiduously once in two months.
Report the progress to the DCC on quarterly basis and  through them to the convenor of SLBC.
On the basis of the feedback received from the DCC  regarding the progress in the implementation of the Monitorable Action Plans  (MAPs), consolidated report will be prepared and tabled at all SLBC meetings  for discussion / information.
iii) As regards the districts with CD ratio less  than 20, these are generally located in hilly, desert, inaccessible terrains  and / or those dependent solely on the primary sector and/ or characterized by  a breakdown of the law and order machinery. In such areas, conventional methods  are not likely to work unless the banking system and the State Government come  together in a specially meaningful way.
iv) While the framework for implementation for  raising the CD ratio in these districts will be the same as in the case of  districts with CD ratio below 40 (i.e setting up of SSC etc.), the focus of  attention and the level of efforts should be of a much higher scale.
For  this,
All such districts should       first be placed in a special category.
Thereafter, the       responsibility for increasing their CD ratio should be taken by banks and       State Governments and the districts should be "adopted" by the       District Administration and the lead bank jointly.
While banks would be       responsible for credit disbursement, the State Government would be       required to give an upfront commitment regarding its responsibilities for       creation of identified rural infrastructure together with support in       creating an enabling environment for banks to lend and to recover their       dues. Given a collaborative framework as outlined above, the Group was of       the view that meaningful increase in CD ratio is possible.
Progress in the special       category districts will be monitored at the district level and reported to       the corporate offices of the concerned banks.
CMDs of banks would give special attention to the CD  ratio in such districts.
11. Monitoring  of LBS by RBI - Monitoring Information System (MIS)
i) Data on Annual Credit Plan (ACP), is an  important element to review the flow of credit in the State. The erstwhile ACP reporting formats comprising  of the ACP statement for target (ACP Statement I) and achievement (ACP  Statement II) have been revised in such a way that Annual Credit Plans are  prepared with the sub sectors Agriculture & allied activities, Micro and  Small Enterprises, Education, Housing and others under priority sector and  Medium Industries, Large industries, Education, Housing and others in the non  priority sectors. Thus, at present, the  reporting statements for ACP target is LBS-MIS-I (
Annex IV
) statement for  disbursement and outstanding LBS-MIS –II (
Annex V
) and ACP achievement  vis-à-vis ACP target LBS-MIS-III (
Annex VI
). Lead banks/SLBC convenor banks have been advised,  to prepare the bank group wise statements of LBS-MIS –I, II and III as per prescribed  formats starting for the year 2013-14 and also place these statements for meaningful  review in all DCC and SLBC meetings.
ii) In order to maintain consistency and integrity  of data with the all India data of scheduled commercial banks and meaningful  review/analysis of data, the ACP and FIP data needs to be grouped separately  for scheduled commercial banks and other banks like State cooperative banks  & DCCBs etc. while presenting in the DCC/SLBC meetings and submitting to  our regional offices. The data of scheduled  commercial banks needs to be further grouped into public sector banks, private  sector banks and Regional Rural Banks to know the bank group wise position.
12. Monitoring of Financial Inclusion Plans  (FIP) –State and District Level
i) SLBC  convenor banks have been advised to compile /consolidate State wise bank group  wise Financial Inclusion Plans for the 3 years in the format LBS-MIS- IV (
Annex  VII
) after obtaining the same from the controlling offices of all banks in  their jurisdiction and to review the progress in SLBC meetings, as per prescribed  format LBS-MIS-V (
Annex VIII
).
ii) In order to maintain consistency and  integrity of data with the all India data of scheduled commercial banks and  meaningful review/analysis of data, the FIP data needs to be grouped separately  for scheduled commercial banks and other banks like State cooperative banks  & DCCBs etc. while presenting in the DCC/SLBC meetings and submitting to  our regional offices. The data of scheduled  commercial banks needs to be further grouped into public sector banks, private  sector banks and Regional Rural Banks to know the bank group wise position.
13. Monitoring  of Roadmap for providing banking services in villages with population below  2000
Under the Roadmap for providing  banking services in villages with population below 2000, SLBC convenor banks  are advised to monitor the progress of roadmap for  covering all unbanked villages with population less than 2000. The quarterly report on the progress made by banks under  above roadmap (bank wise in each district) is required to be forwarded by SLBCs  to the respective Regional Office of Reserve Bank as per the format prescribed  at
Annex III
within 15 days from the close of the quarter.
Appendix
List of Circulars
SR
Circular    No.
Date
Subject
1
RPCD.    CO.LBS. BC. No. 93/02.01.001/2013-14
14.03.2014
Annual    Credit Plans – Potential Linked Plan (PLPs) prepared by NABARD
2
RPCD.    CO.LBS. BC. No. 11/02.01.001/2013-14
09.07.2013
Direct    Benefit Transfer (DBT) Scheme – Implementation - Guidelines
3
RPCD. CO.LBS. BC. No. 12/02.01.001/2012-13
11.05.2013
Lead    Bank Scheme – Assignment of lead bank responsibility in Metro districts
4
RPCD.    CO.LBS. BC. No. 75/02.01.001/2012-13
10.05.2013
Direct    Benefit Transfer (DBT) Scheme – Implementation
5
RPCD.    CO.LBS. BC. No. 68/02.01.001/2012-13
19.03.2013
Lead    Bank Scheme – Strengthening of Monitoring Information System
6
RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.86/02.01.001/2011-12
19.06.2012
Roadmap-Provision    of banking services in villages with population below 2000
7
RPCD.    CO. LBS. B.C. No. 68/02.01.001/2011-12
29.03.2012
SLBC    Website - Standardization of information / data
8
RPCD.    CO. LBS. B.C. No. 67/02.01.001/2011-2012
20.03.2012
Lead    Bank Scheme - District Consultative Committee (DCC) - Inclusion of Director of    MSME-DI
9
RPCD.    CO.LBS. BC. No.60/02.08.001/2011-12
17.02.2012
Lead    Bank Scheme - Participation of public representatives like MP/MLA/ ZP Chiefs    in District Level Review Committee (DLRC) meetings
10
RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.74    /02.19.010/2010-11
30.05.2011
Resolution of    issues regarding allocation of villages under Electronic Benefit Transfer    (EBT) scheme and roadmap for providing banking services in villages with    population above 2000 under Financial Inclusion Plan (FIP)
11
RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.44    /02.19.10/2010-11
29.12.2010
Lead    Bank Scheme – Conduct of State Level Bankers' Committee (SLBC)/Union    Territory Level Bankers' Committee (UTLBC) meetings
12
RPCD.CO.LBS.HLC.BC.    No. 21/02.19.10/2010-11
16.09.2010
High    Level Committee to Review Lead Bank scheme- Providing banking services in every village having    population of over 2000
13
RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No    15 /02.19.10/2010-11
26.07.2010
Lead    Bank Scheme - Revitalising SLBC Meetings
14
RPCD.CO.    LBS.BC.57/ 02.19.10/2009-2010
02.03.2010
Report    of the High Level Committee to Review Lead Bank Scheme - Implementation of    the Recommendations - Lead banks and SCBs
15
RPCD.CO.    LBS.BC.57/ 02.19.10/2009-2010
26.02.2010
Report    of the High Level Committee to Review Lead Bank Scheme - Implementation of    the Recommendations - SLBC Convenor banks
16
RPCD.    CO. LBS. HLC.BC. No. 43/02.19.10/2009-10
27.11.2009
High    Level Committee to review LBS- Providing banking services in every village    having population of over 2000 by March 2011
17
RPCD.LBS.CO.BC.No.111/02.13.03/2008-2009
02.06.2009
Sub-Committee    of SLBC for Export Promotion
18
RPCD.LBS.CO.BC.No.79/    02.01.01/2008-2009
30.12.2008
Inclusion    of issues pertaining to MSME Sector in SLBC meeting
19
RPCD.    LBS. CO.BC. No.33 /02.18.02/2006-07
15.11.2006
Lead    Bank Scheme - Inclusion of National Horticulture Board as a permanent member    of SLBC of the respective State
20
RPCD. LBS. BC. No.20    /02.01.01/2006-07
30.08.2006
Financial    Inclusion by extension of banking services with 'No Frills' accounts and    issue of GCC
21
RPCD.    CO.LBS. BC. No.52/02.02.001/2005-06
06.12.2005
Financing    of projects under Agri clinics & Agri Business Centres Scheme – Review at    meetings
22
RPCD.    No. LBS. BC.50/02.01.01/2005-06
06.12.2005
Participation    in various fora under Lead Bank Scheme
23
RPCD.    CO.LBS.BC. No.47/02.01.001/2005-06
09.11.2005
Credit    Deposit Ratio - Implementation of recommendations of expert group on CD Ratio
24
RPCD.    CO.LBS. BC. No.11/02.01.001/2005-06
06.07.2005
Participation    of MPs/Public Representatives in DLRC meetings - Functions relating to Self    Help Groups (SHGs) Credit Linkage Programme
25
RPCD.    CO.LBS. BC. No.93/02.01.001/2004-05
11.04.2005
Rural    lending - ACPs based on the Potential Linked Plans (PLPs) prepared by NABARD
26
RPCD.    CO.LBS. BC. No.76/02.01.001/2004-05
28.01.2005
Participation    of private sector banks under various fora under Lead Bank Scheme
27
RPCD. CO.LBS. BC. No.62/02.01.001/2004-05
08.12.2004
Rural    lending - Service Area Approach - Review - Relaxation in SAA
28
RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.5/02.01.001/2004-05
16.07.2004
Lead    Bank Scheme - Participation of Members of Parliament and Public    Representatives in District Level Review Committee (DLRC) meetings
29
RPCD. CO.LBS. BC. No.56/02.01.001/2003-04
20.12.2003
Credit    Flow to Boost Economic Growth
30
RPCD. CO.LBS. BC. No.14/02.01.001/2003-04
29.07.2003
Convening    DLRC meetings - Late submission of reports by lead banks
31
RPCD. CO.LBS. BC. No.59/02.01.001/2002-03
06.01.2003
Lead    Bank Scheme - Participation of Members of Parliament and Public    Representatives in District Level Review Committee (DLRC) meetings
32
RPCD. CO.LBS. BC. No.106/02.01.001/2001-02
14.06.2002
Lead    Bank Scheme - Participation of Members of Parliament and Public    Representatives in District Level Review Committee (DLRC) meetings
33
RPCD.CO.LBS.BC. No.85/02.01.001/2000-01
09.05.2001
Lead    Bank Scheme - Participation of Members of Parliament and Public    Representatives in District Level Review Committee (DLRC) meetings
34
RPCD. CO.LBS. BC. No.81/02.01.001/2000-01
27.04.2001
Lead    Bank Scheme - Convening of District Level Review Committee (DLRC) meetings on    quarterly basis- Monitoring of
35
RPCD.LBS.BC.32/02.01.01/2000-01
03.11.2000
Lead    Bank Scheme - Holding of District Level Review Committee Meeting
36
RPCD.No.LBS.BC.86/02.01.01/1996-97
16.12.1996
Inclusion of National    Commission for Scheduled Castes/Tribes in State Level Bankers Committees    (SLBCs)
37
RPCD.No.LBS.BC.13/02.01.01/1996-97
19.07.1996
Inclusion of    Representatives of Khadi and Village Industries Commission/Boards in SLBC/DCC
38
RPCD.No.LBS.BC.118/02.01.01/94-95    February 18, 1995
18.02.1995
Credit    Deposit Ratio of Banks in Rural and Semi-urban Areas
39
RPCD.No.LBS.BC.112/LBC.34/88-89
28.04.1989
State    Level Bankers' Committee - Meetings -
40
RPCD.No.LBS.BC.12/65/88-89
11.08.1988
Service    Area Approach - Constitution of Block Level Bankers' Committees
41
RPCD.No.LBS.BC.100/55-87/88
22.04.1988
Lead    Bank Scheme - District Credit Plan - Annual Action Plan
42
RPCD.No.LBS.BC.87/65-87/88
14.03.1988
Rural    Lending - Service Area of Bank Branches
43
RPCD.No.LBS.BC.69/LBS.34-87/88
14.12.1987
Review    of the Annual Action Plans by State Level Bankers Committees (SLBCs)
44
RPCD.No.LBS.524/55-86/87
28.04.1987
Lead    Bank Scheme - Preparation of District Credit Plans/Annual Action Plans
45
RPCD.No.LBS.430/55/86-87
03.03.1987
Lead    Bank Scheme - District Credit Plans - Guidelines for Fourth Round
46
RPCD.No.LBC.363/1-84
02.11.1984
Integration    of Annual Action Plans (AAPs) with the Performance Budgets of Bank Branches
47
RPCD.No.LBC.162/1-84
06.09.1984
Integration    of Annual Action Plans (AAPs) with the Performance Budgets of Bank Branches
48
RPCD.No.LBC.135/55-84
30.08.1984
Lead    Bank Scheme - Annual Action Plan for 1985 - Guidelines for Formulation of
49
RPCD.No.LBC.96/1-84
18.01.1984
Lead    Bank Scheme - Appointment of Lead Bank Officer - District Co-ordinators
50
RPCD.No.LBC.739/1-83
04.08.1983
Recommendations    of the Working Group to Review the Working of the Lead Bank Scheme
51
RPCD.No.3096/C.517-82/83
13.04.1983
Convenorship    of the State Level Bankers' Committees
52
DBOD.No.    BP.B.BC 74/C/462(E.9)-80
18.06.1980
Credit    Deposit Ratio of banks in Rural and Semi-Urban Areas
53
DBOD.NO.TEP.20/C.517-77
02.02.1977
State Level Bankers’ Committee
54
DBOD.No.    BD.2955/ C.168-70
11.08.1970
Lead    Bank Scheme
55
DBOD.No.    BD4327/ C.168-169
23.12.1969
Branch    Expansion Programme- Allocation of Districts under the Lead Bank Scheme