(876 kb)
Master Circular – “Non-Banking Financial (Non - Deposit Accepting or Holding) Companies Prudential Norms (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2007”
RBI/2014-15/55
DNBS (PD) CC No.381/03.02.001/2014-15
July 1, 2014
(As amended up to  October 30, 2014)
To
All Non-Deposit taking  NBFCs
Dear Sirs,
Master Circular –  “Non-Banking Financial (Non - Deposit Accepting or Holding) Companies  Prudential Norms (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2007”
As you are aware, in  order to have all current instructions on the subject at one place, the Reserve  Bank of India issues updated
circulars/notifications
. The instructions  contained in the
Notification No. DNBS.193 DG(VL)-2007 dated February 22, 2007
updated as on June 30, 2014 are reproduced below. The updated notification has  also been placed on the RBI web-site (
http://www.rbi.org.in
).
Yours faithfully,
(K. K. Vohra)
Principal Chief General  Manager
Table of Contents
Para No
Particulars
1
Short    title, commencement and applicability    of the Directions
2
Definitions
3
Income    recognition
4
Income    from investments
5
Accounting    standards
6
Accounting    of investments
7
Need for Policy on Demand/Call Loans
8
Asset    Classification
9
Provisioning    requirements
10
Disclosure    in the balance sheet
11
Constitution of Audit Committee by    non-banking financial companies
12
Accounting    year
13
Schedule    to the balance sheet
14
Transactions in Government    securities
15
Submission of    a certificate from Statutory Auditor to the Bank
16
Requirement    as to capital adequacy
17
Loans    against non-banking financial company’s own shares prohibited
18
Concentration    of credit/investment
19
Information in regard to    change of address, directors, auditors, etc. to be submitted
20
Norms relating to    Infrastructure loan
21
Exemptions
22
Interpretations
23
Repeal and Saving
24
Submission    of ‘Branch Info’ Return
Appendix
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT OF NON-BANKING SUPERVISION
CENTRAL OFFICE, CENTRE I, WORLD TRADE CENTRE
CUFFE PARADE, COLABA, MUMBAI 400 005
NOTIFICATION  No. DNBS. 193/DG(VL)-2007 dated February 22, 2007
The Reserve Bank of India,  having considered it necessary in the public interest, and being satisfied  that, for the purpose of enabling the Bank to regulate the credit system to the  advantage of the country, it is necessary to issue the Directions relating to  the prudential norms as set out below, in exercise of the powers conferred by  Section 45JA of the Reserve Bank of India  Act, 1934 (2 of 1934) and of all the powers enabling it in this behalf,  and in supersession of the Non-Banking Financial Companies Prudential Norms (Reserve  Bank) Directions, 1998 contained in
Notification  No. DFC. 119/DG(SPT)/98 dated January 31, 1998
, gives to every non-banking  financial company not accepting / holding public deposits the Directions hereinafter  specified.
Short  title, commencement and applicability of  the Directions:
1. (1) These Directions shall  be known as the "Non-Banking Financial (Non- Deposit Accepting or Holding)  Companies Prudential Norms (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2007".
(2) These Directions shall come into force  with immediate effect.
(3) (i) The provisions of these Directions save as  provided for in clauses (ii) (iii) and (iv) hereinafter, shall apply to:
every non-banking financial company not accepting /  holding public deposits
1
[including  an infrastructure finance company]
(ii) The provisions of paragraphs 16 and 18 of  these Directions shall not apply to:
(a) a loan company;
(b) an investment company;
(c) an asset finance company
which is not a systemically important  non-deposit taking non-banking financial company.
(iii) These Directions shall not  apply to a non-banking financial company being an investment company:
Provided that, it is
(a) holding investments in the securities of its  group/ holding/ subsidiary companies and book value of such holding is not less  than ninety per cent of its total assets  and it is not trading in such securities;
(b) not  accepting/holding public deposit; and
(c) is  not a systemically important non-deposit taking non-banking financial  company.
However, the provisions of paragraphs  16 and 18 shall be applicable to such investment companies which are  systemically important non-deposit taking non-banking financial company.
(iv) These Directions except the  provisions of paragraph 19 shall not apply to non-banking financial company  being a Government company as defined under Section 617 of the Companies Act,  1956 (1 of 1956) and not accepting / holding public deposit.
*
(v)
2
[These  Directions shall not apply to a non-banking financial company being a Core  Investment Company referred to in the Core Investment Companies (Reserve Bank)  Directions, 2011 (hereinafter referred to as CIC Directions), which is not a  systemically important Core Investment Company as defined in clause (h) of  sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 3 of the CIC Directions.
(vi) The  provisions of paragraphs 15, 16 and 18 of these Directions shall not apply to a  Systemically Important Core Investment Company as defined in the CIC  Directions, subject to the condition that it submits the Annual Auditors  Certificate and meets with the capital requirements and leverage ratio, as  specified in the CIC Directions.]
(vii)
3
[The  provisions of paragraph 18 of these Directions shall not apply to an NBFC-MFI  as defined in the Non-Banking Financial Company- Micro Finance Institutions  (Reserve Bank) Directions 2011.
The provisions of paragraphs 8 and 9  will not be applicable to an NBFC-MFI w.e.f April 01, 2012.]
Definitions
2. (1) For the purpose of these Directions,  unless the context otherwise requires:
(i) “break up value” means the equity capital and  reserves as reduced by intangible assets and revaluation reserves, divided by  the number of equity shares of the investee company;
(ii) “carrying cost” means book value of the  assets and interest accrued thereon but not received;
(iii) “current investment”  means an investment which is by its nature readily realisable and is intended  to be held for not more than one year from the date on which such investment is  made;
(iv)  “doubtful asset” means:
a term loan, or
a lease asset, or
a hire purchase asset, or
any other asset,
which remains a  sub-standard asset for a period exceeding 18 months;
(v) “earning value” means the value of an equity share computed by taking  the average of profits after tax as reduced by the preference dividend and  adjusted for extra-ordinary and non-recurring items, for the immediately  preceding three years and further divided by the number of equity shares of the  investee company and capitalised at the following rate:
(a) in case of predominantly  manufacturing company, eight per cent;
(b) in case of predominantly trading  company, ten per cent; and
(c) in case of any other company,  including non-banking financial company, twelve per cent;
Note: If, an investee company is  a loss making company, the earning value will be taken at zero;
(vi) “fair  value” means the mean of the earning value and the break up value;
(vii) “hybrid debt” means capital instrument which possesses certain characteristics of equity as well as of  debt;
4
[(viia)  “"Infrastructure Finance Company” means a non-banking finance company which deploys at least 75 per  cent of its total assets in infrastructure loans]
5
[A credit facility extended by lenders  (i.e. NBFCs) to a borrower for exposure in the following infrastructure  sub-sectors will qualify as "Infrastructure lending.]
Sr. No.
Category
Infrastructure    sub-sectors
1.
Transport
i
Roads and bridges
ii
Ports
1
iii
Inland Waterways
iv
Airport
v
Railway Track, tunnels,    viaducts, bridges
2
vi
Urban Public Transport (except rolling stock in case of urban road transport)
2.
Energy
i
Electricity Generation
ii
Electricity Transmission
iii
Electricity Distribution
iv
Oil pipelines
v
Oil / Gas / Liquefied Natural    Gas (LNG) storage facility
3
vi
Gas pipelines
4
3.
Water & Sanitation
i
Solid Waste Management
ii
Water supply pipelines
iii
Water treatment plants
iv
Sewage collection,    treatment and disposal system
v
Irrigation (dams, channels,    embankments etc)
vi
Storm Water Drainage System
vii
Slurry Pipelines
4.
Communication
i
Telecommunication (Fixed    network)
5
ii
Telecommunication towers
iii
Telecommunication &    Telecom Services
5.
Social and Commercial    Infrastructure
i
Education Institutions    (capital stock)
ii
Hospitals (capital stock)
6
iii
Three-star or higher    category classified hotels located outside cities with population of more    than 1 million
iv
Common infrastructure for    industrial parks, SEZ, tourism facilities and agriculture markets
v
Fertilizer (Capital    investment)
vi
Post harvest storage    infrastructure for agriculture and horticultural produce including cold    storage
vii
Terminal markets
viii
Soil-testing laboratories
ix
Cold Chain
7
x.
Hotels with project cost
8
of more than Rs.200    crores each in any place in India and of any star rating.
xi.
Convention Centres with project cost
8
of more than    Rs.300 crores each
Notes
1
Includes Capital Dredging
2
Includes supporting    terminal infrastructure such as loading / unloading terminals, stations and    buildings
3
Includes strategic storage    of crude oil
4
Includes city gas    distribution network
5
Includes optic fibre /    cable networks which provide broadband / internet
6
Includes Medical Colleges,    Para Medical Training Institutes and Diagnostics Centres
7
Includes cold room facility    for farm level pre-cooling, for preservation or storage of agriculture and    allied produce, marine products and meat.
8
Applicable with prospective    effect from the date of this circular and available for eligible projects for    a period of three years; Eligible costs exclude cost of land and lease    charges but include interest during construction.
(viiia)
6
[An  NBFC-MFI means a non-deposit taking NBFC(other than a company licensed under  Section 25 of the Indian Companies Act, 1956) that fulfils the following  conditions:
i. Minimum Net Owned  Funds of Rs.5 crore. (For NBFC-MFIs registered in the North Eastern Region of  the country, the minimum NOF requirement shall stand at Rs. 2 crore).
ii. Not less than 85% of its net assets  are in the nature of “qualifying assets.”
For  the purpose of ii. above, “Net assets” are defined as total assets other than  cash and bank balances and money market instruments.
“Qualifying asset” shall mean a loan which  satisfies the following criteria:-
i.  loan disbursed by an NBFC-MFI to a borrower with a rural household annual  income not exceeding Rs. 60,000 or urban and semi-urban household income not  exceeding Rs. 1,20,000;
ii.  loan amount does not exceed Rs. 35,000 in the first cycle and Rs. 50,000 in  subsequent cycles;
iii.  total indebtedness of the borrower does not exceed Rs. 50,000;
iv.  tenure of the loan not to be less than 24 months for loan amount in excess of  Rs. 15,000 with prepayment without penalty;
v.  loan to be extended without collateral;
vi.  aggregate amount of loans, given for income generation, is not less than
7
[70  per cent] of the total loans given by the MFIs;
vii.  loan is repayable on weekly, fortnightly or monthly instalments at the choice  of the borrower.]
(viiib)
8
[Non-Banking  Financial Company - Factor’ means a non-banking financial company as defined in  clause (
f
) of section 45-I of the RBI Act, 1934 having financial assets  in the factoring business at least to the extent of 75 percent of its total  assets and its income derived from factoring business is not less than 75  percent of its gross income and has been granted a certificate of registration  under sub-section (
1
) of section 3 of the Factoring Regulation Act,  2011.]
(viiic)
9
[Non-Operative  Financial Holding Company (NOFHC) means a non-deposit taking NBFC referred to  in the
10
"Guidelines for Licensing of New Banks in the Private Sector"
issued  by Reserve Bank, which holds the shares of a banking company and the shares of  all other financial services companies in its group, whether regulated by  Reserve Bank or by any other financial regulator, to the extent permissible  under the applicable regulatory prescriptions.]
(ix) “loss asset” means:
(a) an asset which has been identified as loss asset by the non-banking  financial company or its internal or external auditor or by the Reserve  Bank of India during the inspection of  the non-banking financial company, to the extent it is not written off by the  non-banking financial company; and
(b)  an asset which is adversely affected by a potential threat of  non-recoverability due to either erosion  in the value of security or non availability of security or due to any  fraudulent act or omission on the part of the borrower;
(x) “long term investment” means an  investment other than a current investment;
(xi) “net asset value”  means the latest declared net asset value by the mutual fund concerned in  respect of that particular scheme;
(xii) “net book value”  means:
(a)  in the case of hire purchase asset, the aggregate of overdue and future  instalments receivable as reduced by the balance of unmatured finance charges  and further reduced by the provisions made as per paragraph 9(2)(i) of these  Directions;
(b)  in the case of leased asset, aggregate  of capital portion  of overdue lease rentals accounted as receivable and depreciated book  value of the lease asset as adjusted by the balance of lease adjustment  account.
(xiii) ‘non-performing asset’ (referred to in  these Directions as “NPA”) means:
an asset, in respect of  which, interest has remained overdue for  a period of six months or more;
a term loan inclusive of  unpaid interest, when the instalment is overdue for a period of six months or  more or on which interest amount remained overdue for a period of six months or  more;
a demand or call loan,  which remained overdue for a period of six months or more from the date of  demand or call or on which interest amount remained overdue for a period of six  months or more;
a bill which remains overdue  for a period of six months or more;
the interest in respect of  a debt or the income on receivables under the head ‘other current assets’ in  the nature of short term loans/advances, which facility remained overdue for a  period of six months or more;
any dues on account of sale  of assets or services rendered or reimbursement of expenses incurred, which  remained overdue for a period of six months or more;
the lease rental and hire  purchase instalment, which has become overdue for a period of twelve months or  more;
in  respect of loans, advances and other credit facilities (including bills  purchased and discounted), the balance outstanding under the credit facilities  (including accrued interest) made available to the same borrower/beneficiary  when any of the above credit facilities becomes non-performing asset:
Provided that in the case of lease and  hire purchase transactions, a non-banking financial company may classify each  such account on the basis of its record of recovery;
(xiv) “owned fund” means  paid up equity capital, preference shares which are compulsorily convertible  into equity, free reserves, balance in share premium account and capital  reserves representing surplus arising out of sale proceeds of asset, excluding  reserves created by revaluation of asset, as reduced by accumulated loss  balance, book value of intangible assets and deferred revenue expenditure, if  any;
(xv) “standard asset” means  the asset in respect of which, no default in repayment of principal or payment  of interest is perceived and which does not disclose any problem nor carry more  than normal risk attached to the business;
(xvi) “sub-standard asset”  means:
an  asset which has been classified as non-performing asset for a period not  exceeding 18 months;
an  asset where the terms of the agreement regarding interest and / or principal  have been renegotiated or rescheduled or  restructured after commencement of  operations, until the expiry of one year of satisfactory performance under the  renegotiated or rescheduled or restructured terms:
Provided that the classification of  infrastructure loan as a sub-standard asset shall be in accordance with the  provisions of paragraph 20 of these Directions;
(xvii) "subordinated  debt" means an instrument, which is fully paid up, is unsecured and is subordinated to the claims  of other creditors and is free from restrictive clauses and is not redeemable  at the instance of the holder or without the consent of the supervisory  authority of the non-banking financial company. The book value of such instrument  shall be subjected to discounting as provided hereunder:
Remaining Maturity of the instruments
Rate of discount
(a) Upto one year
100 per cent
(b) More than one year but upto two years
80 per cent
(c) More than two years but upto three years
60 per cent
(d) More than three years but upto four years
40 per cent
(e) More than four years but upto five years
20 per cent
to the extent such  discounted value does not exceed fifty per cent of Tier I capital;
(xviii) “substantial  interest” means holding of a beneficial interest by an individual or  his spouse or minor child, whether singly or taken together in the shares of a company, the amount paid up  on which exceeds ten per cent of the paid up capital of the company; or the capital subscribed by all the partners  of a partnership firm;
(xix) ‘Systemically important non-deposit taking  non-banking financial company', means a non-banking financial company not  accepting / holding public deposits and having total assets of Rs 100 crore and  above as shown in the last audited  balance sheet;
(xx) “Tier I Capital” means owned fund as reduced  by investment in shares of other non-banking financial companies and in shares,  debentures, bonds, outstanding loans and advances including hire purchase and lease finance  made to and deposits with subsidiaries  and companies in the same group exceeding, in aggregate, ten per cent of the  owned fund;
11
[and  perpetual debt instruments issued by a  Systemically important non-deposit taking non-banking financial company in each  year to the extent it does not exceed 15% of the aggregate Tier I Capital of such company as on March 31 of the  previous accounting year;]
(xxi) “Tier II capital” includes the following:
(a) preference shares other than those  which are compulsorily convertible into equity;
(b) revaluation  reserves at discounted rate of fifty  five percent;
(c)
12
[General Provisions (including that  for Standard Assets) and loss reserves to the extent these are not attributable  to actual diminution in value or identifiable potential loss in any specific  asset and are available to meet unexpected losses, to the extent of one and one  fourth percent of risk weighted assets;]
(d) hybrid debt  capital instruments;
(e) subordinated  debt;
13
[and
(f) perpetual debt instruments issued by a  Systemically important non-deposit taking non-banking financial company which  is in excess of what qualifies for Tier I Capital,]
to the extent the aggregate  does not exceed Tier I capital.
(2) Other words or  expressions used but not defined herein and defined in the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of  1934) or the Non-Banking Financial Companies Acceptance of Public Deposits  (Reserve Bank) Directions, 1998 shall have the same meaning as assigned to  them under that Act or that Directions. Any other words or expressions not defined in  that Act or that Directions, shall have the same meaning assigned to them in  the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).
Income  recognition
3. (1)  The income recognition shall be based on  recognised accounting principles.
(2) Income including interest/discount  or any other charges on NPA shall be recognised only when it is actually  realised. Any such income recognised before the asset became non-performing and  remaining unrealised shall be reversed.
(3) In respect of hire purchase  assets, where instalments are overdue for more than 12 months, income shall be  recognised only when hire charges are actually received. Any such income taken  to the credit of profit and loss account before the asset became non-performing  and remaining unrealised, shall be reversed.
(4) In respect of lease assets, where  lease rentals are overdue for more than 12 months, the income shall be  recognised only when lease rentals are actually received. The net lease rentals  taken to the credit of profit and loss account before the asset became  non-performing and remaining unrealised shall be reversed.
Explanation
For the purpose of this paragraph, ‘net lease  rentals’ mean gross lease rentals as adjusted by the lease adjustment account  debited/credited to the profit and loss account and as reduced by depreciation  at the rate applicable under Schedule XIV of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of  1956).
Income  from investments
4. (1) Income from dividend  on shares of corporate bodies and units of mutual funds shall be taken into  account on cash basis:
Provided that the income  from dividend on shares of corporate bodies may be taken into account on  accrual basis when such dividend has been declared by the corporate body in its  annual general meeting and the non-banking financial company’s right to  receive payment is established.
(2) Income from bonds and  debentures of corporate bodies and from Government securities/bonds may be  taken into account on accrual basis:
Provided that the interest  rate on these instruments is pre-determined and interest is serviced regularly  and is not in arrears.
(3) Income on securities of corporate bodies or public sector undertakings,  the payment of interest and repayment of principal of which have been  guaranteed by Central Government or a State Government may be taken into  account on accrual basis.
Accounting  standards
5. Accounting Standards and Guidance Notes  issued by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (referred to in these  Directions as “ICAI”) shall be followed insofar as they are not inconsistent  with any of these Directions.
Accounting  of investments
6. (1)(a) The Board of  Directors of every non-banking financial company shall frame investment policy  for the company and implement the same;
(b) The criteria  to classify the investments into current and long term investments shall  be spelt out by the Board of the company in the investment policy;
(c) Investments  in securities shall be classified into  current and long term, at the time of making each investment;
(d) (i) There  shall be no inter-class transfer on ad-hoc basis;
(ii) The  inter-class transfer, if warranted, shall be effected only at the beginning of  each half year, on April 1 or October 1,  with the approval of the Board;
(iii) The  investments shall be transferred scrip-wise, from current to long-term or  vice-versa, at book value or market value, whichever is lower;
(iv) The  depreciation, if any, in each scrip shall be fully provided for and  appreciation, if any, shall be ignored;
(v) The depreciation in one scrip shall not be set off  against appreciation in another scrip, at the time of such inter-class  transfer, even in respect of the scrips of the same category.
(2) Quoted current investments shall, for the purposes of valuation,  be grouped into the following categories, viz.
(a) equity shares,
(b) preference shares,
(c) debentures and  bonds,
(d) Government  securities including treasury bills,
(e) units of mutual  fund, and
(f) others.
Quoted current investments for each  category shall be valued at cost or market value whichever is lower. For this purpose, the investments in each  category shall be considered scrip-wise and the cost and market value  aggregated for all investments in each category. If the aggregate market value for the  category is less than the aggregate cost for that category, the net  depreciation shall be provided for or charged to the profit and loss account.  If the ag­gregate market value for the category exceeds the aggregate cost for  the category, the net appreciation shall be ignored. Depreciation in one category of investments  shall not be set off against appreciation in another category.
(3) Unquoted equity shares in the  nature of current investments shall be valued at cost or breakup value,  whichever is lower. However, non-banking  financial companies may substitute fair value for the breakup value of the  shares, if considered necessary. Where  the balance sheet of the investee company is not available for two years, such  shares shall be valued at one Rupee only.
(4) Unquoted preference  shares in the nature of current investments shall be valued at cost or face  value, whichever is lower.
(5) Investments in unquoted Government  securities or Government guaranteed bonds shall be valued at carrying cost.
(6) Unquoted investments in the units  of mutual funds in the nature of current investments shall be valued at the net  asset value declared by the mutual fund in respect of each particular scheme.
(7) Commercial papers shall be valued  at carrying cost.
(8) A long  term investment shall be valued in accordance with the Accounting Standard  issued by ICAI.
Note:
Unquoted  debentures shall be treated as term loans or other type of credit facilities  depending upon the tenure of such debentures for the purpose of income  recognition and asset classification.
Need for  Policy on Demand/Call Loans
7. (1) The Board of Directors of every non-banking financial  company granting/intending to grant  demand/call loans shall frame a  policy for the company and  implement the same.
(2) Such policy shall, inter alia, stipulate the following,-
A cut off date within which the  repayment of demand or call loan shall be demanded or called up;
The sanctioning authority shall,  record specific reasons in writing at the time of sanctioning demand or call  loan, if the cut off date for demanding or calling up such loan is stipulated  beyond a period of one year from the date of sanction;
The rate of interest which shall  be payable on such loans;
Interest on such loans, as  stipulated shall be payable either at monthly or quarterly rests;
The sanctioning authority shall,  record specific reasons in writing at the time of sanctioning demand or call  loan, if no interest is stipulated or a moratorium is granted for any period;
A cut off date, for review of  performance of the loan, not exceeding  six months commencing from the date of sanction;
Such demand or call loans shall  not be renewed unless the periodical review has shown satisfactory compliance  with the terms of sanction.
Asset  Classification
8. (1) Every  non-banking financial company shall, after taking into account the degree of  well defined credit weaknesses and extent of dependence on collateral security  for realisation, classify its lease/hire purchase assets, loans and advances  and any other forms of credit into the following classes, namely:
(i) Standard assets;
(ii) Sub-standard assets;
(iii) Doubtful assets; and
(iv) Loss assets.
(2) The class of assets referred to above  shall not be upgraded merely as a result of rescheduling, unless it satisfies  the conditions required for the upgradation.
Provisioning  requirements
9. Every non-banking financial company  shall, after taking into account the  time lag between an account becoming non-performing, its recognition as such,  the realisation of the security and the erosion over time in the value of  security charged, make provision against  sub-standard assets, doubtful assets and loss assets as provided hereunder:-
Loans,  advances and other credit facilities including bills purchased and discounted-
(1) The provisioning requirement in respect of loans,  advances and other credit facilities including bills purchased and discounted  shall be as under:
(i) Loss Assets
The entire asset  shall be written off. If the assets are permitted to remain in the books for any reason, 100%  of the outstanding should be  provided  for;
(ii) Doubtful Assets
(a) 100% provision to  the extent to which the advance is not covered by the realisable value of the  security to which the non-banking financial company has a valid recourse shall  be made. The realisable value is to be estimated on a realistic basis;
(b) In  addition to item (a)  above, depending upon the  period for which  the asset has remained doubtful,  provision to the extent of 20%  to 50% of the secured portion (i.e.  Estimated realisable value of the outstanding)  shall be made on the following basis:-
Period for which the asset has been considered as doubtful
Per cent of provision
Up to one year
20
One to three years
30
More than three years
50
(iii) Sub-standard  assets
A general provision  of 10 percent of total outstanding shall  be made.
(2) Lease  and hire purchase assets -
The provisioning  requirements in respect of hire purchase and leased assets shall be as under:
(i) Hire purchase assets - In  respect of hire purchase assets, the total dues (overdue and future instalments  taken together) as reduced by
(a)  the finance charges not credited to the profit and loss account and carried  forward as unma­tured finance charges; and
(b) the depreciated value of the underlying asset,  shall be provided for.
Explanation
: For the purpose of this  paragraph,
the  depreciat­ed value of the asset shall be notionally computed as the original cost of the asset to  be reduced by deprecia­tion at the rate  of twenty per cent per annum on a straight line method; and
in  the case of second hand asset, the original cost shall be the actual cost  incurred for acquisition of such second  hand asset.
Additional provision for hire  purchase and leased assets
(ii) In respect of hire purchase and leased assets, additional  provision shall be made as under:
(a) Where  hire charges or lease rentals are overdue upto 12  months
Nil
(b) Where hire charges or lease rentals are overdue  for more than 12 months but upto 24  months
10 percent of the net book value
(c) Where hire charges or lease rentals are overdue  for more than 24 months but upto 36  months
40 percent of the net book value
(d) where hire charges or lease rentals are overdue  for more than 36 months but upto 48  months
70 percent of the net book value
(e) where hire  charges or lease rentals are overdue  for more than 48 months
100 percent of the net book value
(iii) On expiry of a period of 12 months after the  due date of the last instalment of hire purchase/leased asset, the entire net  book value shall be fully provided for.
Notes:
(1) The amount of caution money/margin  money or security deposits kept by the borrower with the non-banking financial  company in pursuance of the hire purchase agreement may be deducted against the  provisions stipulated under clause (i) above, if not already taken into  account while arriving at the equated  monthly instalments under the agreement. The value of any other security  available in pursuance to the hire purchase agreement may be deducted only  against the provisions stipulated under clause (ii) above.
(2) The  amount of security deposits kept by the borrower with the non-banking financial  company in pursuance to the lease agreement together with the value of any  other security available in pursuance to the lease agreement may be deducted  only against the provisions stipulated under clause (ii) above.
(3) It  is clarified that income recognition on and provisioning against NPAs  are two different  aspects of prudential norms and provisions as per the  norms are required to be made on NPAs on total outstanding balances including  the depreciated book value of the leased asset under reference after adjusting  the balance, if any, in the lease adjustment account. The fact that income on an NPA has not been  recognised cannot be taken as reason for not making provision.
(4) An asset  which has been renegotiated or  rescheduled as referred to in paragraph (2) (1) (xvi) (b) of these Directions  shall be a sub-standard asset or continue to remain in the same category in  which it was prior to its renegotiation or reschedulement as a doubtful asset  or a loss asset as the case may be.  Necessary provision is required to be made as applicable to such asset till it  is upgraded.
(5) The  balance sheet to be prepared by the NBFC may be in accordance with the  provisions contained in sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 10.
(6) All  financial leases written on or after April 1, 2001 attract the provisioning requirements as  applicable to hire purchase assets.
(7)
14
[In case of NBFC-MFIs, if  the advance covered by Credit Risk Guarantee Fund Trust for Low Income Housing  (CRGFTLIH) guarantee becomes non-performing, no provision need be made towards  the guaranteed portion. The amount outstanding in excess of the guaranteed  portion should be provided for as per the extant guidelines on provisioning for  non-performing advances.]
15
[9A. Every Non Banking Financial Company  shall make provision for standard assets at 0.25 percent of the outstanding,  which shall not be reckoned for arriving at net NPAs. The provision towards  standard assets need not be netted from gross advances but shall be shown  separately as ‘Contingent Provisions against Standard Assets’ in the balance  sheet.]
Disclosure  in the balance sheet
10. (1) Every non-banking financial company shall separately disclose in its  balance sheet the provisions made as per paragraph 9 above without netting them  from the income or against the value of assets.
(2) The provisions shall be  distinctly indicated under separate heads of account as under:-
(i)  provisions for bad and doubtful debts; and
(ii) provisions for depreciation in investments.
(3) Such provisions shall  not be appropriated from the general provisions and loss reserves held, if any,  by the non-banking financial company.
(4) Such provisions for  each year shall be debited to the profit and loss account. The excess of  provisions, if any, held under the heads general provisions and loss reserves  may be written back without making adjustment against them.
16
[(5)  Every systemically important non-deposit taking non-banking financial company  shall disclose the following particulars in its Balance Sheet:
Capital  to Risk Assets Ratio (CRAR);
Exposure  to real estate sector, both direct and indirect; and
Maturity pattern of assets and  liabilities.]
Constitution of Audit Committee by non-banking financial  companies
11. A non-banking financial company having assets of Rs. 50 crore  and above as per its last audited balance sheet shall constitute an Audit  Committee, consisting of not less than three members of its Board of Directors.
Explanation I: The  Audit Committee constituted by a non-banking financial company as required under  Section 292A of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) shall be the Audit  Committee for the purposes of this paragraph.
Explanation II: The Audit Committee constituted under this  paragraph shall have the same powers, functions and duties as laid down in  Section 292A of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).
Accounting  year
12. Every non-banking financial company  shall prepare its balance sheet and profit and loss account as on March 31  every year. Whenever a non-banking financial company intends to  extend the date of its balance sheet as per provisions of the Companies Act, it  should take prior approval of the Reserve Bank of India before approaching the  Registrar of Companies for this purpose.
Further,  even in cases where the Bank and the Registrar of Companies grant extension of time, the non-banking  financial company shall furnish to the Bank a proforma balance  sheet (unaudited ) as on March 31 of the year and the statutory returns due on  the said date.
17
[Every non-banking financial company shall  finalise its balance sheet within a period of 3 months from the date to which  it pertains.]
Schedule  to the balance sheet
13. Every non-banking financial company shall append to its  balance sheet prescribed under the Companies Act, 1956, the particulars in the  schedule as set out in Annex.
Transactions in Government securities
14. Every non-banking  financial company may undertake transactions in Government securities through  its CSGL account or its demat account:
Provided that no  non-banking financial company shall undertake any transaction in government  security in physical form through any broker.
Submission of a certificate from Statutory  Auditor to the Bank
15. Every  non-banking  financial company shall submit a Certificate from its  Statutory Auditor that it is engaged in the
18
[business]  of non-banking financial institution requiring it to hold a Certificate of  Registration under Section 45-IA of the RBI Act. A certificate  from the Statutory Auditor in this regard with reference to the position of the  company as at end of the financial year ended March 31 may be submitted to the  Regional Office of the Department of Non-Banking Supervision under whose  jurisdiction the non-banking  financial company is registered,
19
[within  one month from the date of finalization of the balance sheet and in any case  not later than December 30th of that year.] Such  certificate shall also indicate the asset / income pattern of the non-banking financial  company for making it eligible for  classification as Asset Finance Company, Investment Company or Loan Company.
20
[For  an NBFC-MFI, such Certificate will also indicate that the company fulfills all  conditions stipulated to be classified as an NBFC-MFI in the
notification  DNBS.PD.No.234/CGM(US)-2011 dated December 02, 2011
.]
21
[For  an NBFC-Factor, such Certificate will indicate the requirement of holding the  certificate under section 3 of the Factoring Act. The certificate will also  indicate the percentage of factoring assets and income, the compliance that it fulfills  all conditions stipulated under the Act to be classified as an NBFC-Factor and  compliance to minimum capitalization norms, if FDI has been received.]
Requirement  as to capital adequacy
16. (1) Every systemically important non-deposit taking non-banking  financial company shall maintain, with effect from April 1, 2007, a minimum capital ratio consisting of Tier  I and Tier II capital which shall not be  less than ten per cent of its aggregate risk weighted assets on balance sheet  and of risk adjusted value of off-balance sheet items;
22
[Such ratio shall not be less than 12% by March 31,  2010 and 15% by March 31, 2011.]
(2) The total of Tier II capital, at any  point of time, shall not exceed one hundred per cent of Tier I capital.
(3)
23
[NBFCs  primarily engaged in lending against gold jewellery (such loans comprising 50  percent or more of their financial assets) shall maintain a minimum Tier l  capital of 12 percent by April 01, 2014.]
Explanations:
On  balance sheet assets –
(1)  In these  Directions, degrees of credit risk expressed as percentage weightages have been  assigned to balance sheet assets. Hence, the value of each asset / item  requires to be multiplied by the relevant risk weights to arrive at risk  adjusted value of assets. The aggregate shall be taken into account for  reckoning the minimum capital ratio. The risk weighted asset shall be  calculated as the weighted aggregate of funded items as detailed hereunder:
Weighted risk assets – On-Balance Sheet items
Percentage  weight
(i) Cash and bank balances including 
          fixed deposits and  certificates of deposits with banks
0
(ii)
Investments
(a) Approved securities [Except at (c) below]
0
(b) Bonds of public  sector banks
20
(c) Fixed  deposits/certificates of deposits/bonds of public financial institutions
100
(d) Shares of all companies and debentures/bonds/ commercial papers of all companies  and units of all mutual funds
100
(iii)
Current  assets
(a) Stock on hire  (net book value)
100
(b) Intercorporate  loans/deposits
100
(c) Loans and advances  fully secured against deposits held by the company itself
0
(d) Loans to staff
0
(e) Other secured  loans and advances considered good
100
(f) Bills  purchased/discounted
100
(g) Others (To be  specified)
100
(iv)
Fixed  Assets(net of depreciation)
(a) Assets leased  out (net book value)
100
(b) Premises
100
(c) Furniture &  Fixtures
100
(v)
Other assets
(a) Income tax  deducted at source (net of provision)
0
(b) Advance tax paid  (net of provision)
0
(c) Interest due on  Government securities
0
(d) Others (to be  specified)
100
Notes:
(1) Netting may be done only in respect of assets where provisions for  depreciation or for bad and doubtful debts have been made.
(2) Assets which have been deducted from owned fund to arrive at net owned  fund shall have a weightage of `zero’.
(3) While calculating the aggregate of funded  exposure of a borrower for the purpose of assignment of risk weight, such  non-banking financial companies may net off the amount of cash margin/caution  money/security deposits (against which right to set-off is available) held as  collateral against the advances out of the total outstanding exposure of the  borrower.
(4)
24
[Deleted]
(5)
25
[For  loans guaranteed by Credit Risk Guarantee Fund Trust for Low Income Housing  (CRGFTLIH) NBFC-MFIs may assign zero risk weight for the guaranteed portion.  The balance outstanding in excess of the guaranteed portion would attract a  risk-weight as per extant guidelines]
26
[
Off-balance sheet items
(2)
27
[Deleted]
A. General
NBFCs will calculate the total risk weighted  off-balance sheet credit exposure as the sum of the risk-weighted amount of the  market related and non-market related off-balance sheet items. The  risk-weighted amount of an off-balance sheet item that gives rise to credit  exposure will be calculated by means of a two-step process:
(a) the notional amount of the  transaction is converted into a credit equivalent amount, by multiplying the  amount by the specified credit conversion factor or by applying the current  exposure method; and
(b) the resulting  credit equivalent amount is multiplied by the risk weight applicable viz. zero  percent for exposure to Central Government/State Governments, 20 percent for  exposure to banks and 100 percent for others.
B. Non-market-related off- balance sheet  items
i. The credit equivalent amount in relation  to a non-market related off-balance sheet item will be determined by  multiplying the contracted amount of that particular transaction by the  relevant credit conversion factor (CCF).
Sr. No.
Instruments
Credit Conversion Factor
i.
Financial    & other guarantees
100
ii.
Share/debenture    underwriting obligations
50
iii.
Partly-paid    shares/debentures
100
iv.
Bills    discounted/rediscounted
100
v.
Lease contracts entered into but yet to be executed
100
vi.
Sale and    repurchase agreement and asset sales with recourse, where the credit risk    remains with the NBFC.
100
vii.
Forward    asset purchases, forward deposits and partly paid shares and securities,    which represent commitments with certain draw down.
100
viii.
Lending of    NBFC securities or posting of securities as collateral by NBFC, including    instances where these arise out of repo style transactions
100
ix.
Other    commitments (e.g., formal standby facilities and credit lines) with an original    maturity of
up to one year
over one    year
20
50
x.
28
29
[Similar    commitments that are unconditionally cancellable at any time by the NBFC    without prior notice or that effectively provide for automatic cancellation    due to deterioration in a borrower’s credit worthiness].
0
xi.
Take-out    Finance in the books of taking-over institution
(i)
Unconditional    take-out finance
100
(ii)
Conditional    take-out finance
50
Note : As    the counter-party exposure will determine the risk weight, it will be 100    percent in respect of all borrowers or zero percent if covered by Government    guarantee.
xii.
Commitment    to provide liquidity facility for securitization of standard asset    transactions
100
xiii.
Second    loss credit enhancement for securitization of standard asset transactions    provided by third party
100
xiv.
Other contingent liabilities (To be specified)
50
Note:
i. Cash margins/deposits shall be deducted  before applying the conversion factor
ii. Where the non-market related off-balance  sheet item is an undrawn or partially undrawn fund-based facility, the amount  of undrawn commitment to be included in calculating the off-balance sheet  non-market related credit exposures is the maximum unused portion of the  commitment that could be drawn during the remaining period to maturity. Any  drawn portion of a commitment forms a part of NBFC’s on-balance sheet credit  exposure.
30
[For example:
A term loan of Rs. 700 cr is sanctioned for a large project which can be  drawn down in stages over a three year period. The terms of sanction allow draw  down in three stages – Rs. 150 cr in Stage I, Rs. 200 cr in Stage II and Rs.  350 cr in Stage III, where the borrower needs the NBFC’s explicit approval for  draw downunder Stages II and III after completion of certain formalities. If  the borrower has drawn already Rs. 50 cr under Stage I, then the undrawn  portion would be computed with reference to Stage I alone i.e., it will be  Rs.100 cr. If Stage I is scheduled to be completed within one year, the CCF will  be 20 percent and if it is more than one year then the applicable CCF will be  50 per cent].
C. Market  Related Off-Balance Sheet Items
i. NBFCs  should take into account all market related off-balance sheet items (OTC  derivatives and Securities Financing Transactions such as repo / reverse repo/  CBLO etc.) while calculating the risk weighted off-balance sheet credit  exposures.
ii. The  credit risk on market related off-balance sheet items is the cost to an NBFC of  replacing the cash flow specified by the contract in the event of counterparty  default. This would depend, among other things, upon the maturity of the  contract and on the volatility of rates underlying the type of instrument.
iii. Market  related off-balance sheet items would include:
(a) interest rate contracts - including single  currency interest rate swaps, basis swaps, forward rate agreements, and  interest rate futures;
(b) foreign exchange contracts, including contracts  involving gold, - includes cross currency swaps (including cross currency  interest rate swaps), forward foreign exchange contracts, currency futures,  currency options;
(c) Credit Default Swaps; and
(d) any other market related contracts specifically allowed by the  Reserve Bank which give rise to credit risk.
iv.  Exemption from capital requirements is permitted for -
(a) foreign exchange (except gold) contracts which  have an original maturity of 14 calendar days or less; and
(b) instruments traded on futures and options  exchanges which are subject to daily mark-to-market and margin payments.
v. The  exposures to Central Counter Parties (CCPs), on account of derivatives trading  and securities financing transactions (e.g. Collateralized Borrowing and  Lending Obligations - CBLOs, Repos) outstanding against them will be assigned  zero exposure value for counterparty credit risk, as it is presumed that the  CCPs' exposures to their counterparties are fully collateralized on a daily  basis, thereby providing protection for the CCP's credit risk exposures.
vi. A CCF of  100 per cent will be applied to the corporate securities posted as collaterals  with CCPs and the resultant off-balance sheet exposure will be assigned risk  weights appropriate to the nature of the CCPs. In the case of Clearing  Corporation of India Limited (CCIL), the risk weight will be 20 per cent and  for other CCPs, risk weight will be 50 percent.
vii. The  total credit exposure to a counterparty in respect of derivative transactions  should be calculated according to the current exposure method as explained  below:
D. Current  Exposure Method
The credit  equivalent amount of a market related off-balance sheet transaction calculated  using the current exposure method is the sum of a) current credit exposure and  b) potential future credit exposure of the contract.
(a) Current credit exposure is defined as the  sum of the gross positive mark-to-market value of all contracts with respect to  a single counterparty (positive and negative marked-to-market values of various  contracts with the same counterparty should not be netted). The Current  Exposure Method requires periodical calculation of the current credit exposure  by marking these contracts to market.
(b)  Potential future credit exposure is determined by multiplying the notional  principal amount of each of these contracts, irrespective of whether the  contract has a zero, positive or negative mark-to-market value by the relevant  add-on factor indicated below according to the nature and residual maturity of  the instrument.
Credit Conversion    Factors for interest rate related, exchange rate related and gold related    derivatives
Credit Conversion    Factors (%)
Interest Rate    Contracts
Exchange Rate    Contracts & Gold
One year or less
0.50
2.00
Over one year to five years
1.00
10.00
Over five years
3.00
15.00
i. For  contracts with multiple exchanges of principal, the add-on factors are to be  multiplied by the number of remaining payments in the contract.
ii. For  contracts that are structured to settle outstanding exposure following  specified payment dates and where the terms are reset such that the market  value of the contract is zero on these specified dates, the residual maturity  would be set equal to the time until the next reset date. However, in the case  of interest rate contracts which have residual maturities of more than one year  and meet the above criteria, the CCF or add-on factor is subject to a floor of  1.0 per cent.
iii. No  potential future credit exposure would be calculated for single currency  floating / floating interest rate swaps; the credit exposure on these contracts  would be evaluated solely on the basis of their mark-to-market value.
iv.  Potential future exposures should be based on 'effective' rather than 'apparent  notional amounts'. In the event that the 'stated notional amount' is leveraged  or enhanced by the structure of the transaction, the 'effective notional  amount' must be used for determining potential future exposure. For example, a  stated notional amount of USD 1 million with payments based on an internal rate  of two times the lending rate of the NBFC would have an effective notional  amount of USD 2 million.
31
[“E. Credit conversion factors for Credit  Default Swaps (CDS)]:
NBFCs are only permitted to buy credit  protection to hedge their credit risk on corporate bonds they hold. The bonds  may be held in current category or permanent category. The capital charge for  these exposures will be as under:
(i) For corporate bonds held in current  category and hedged by CDS where there is no mismatch between the CDS and the  hedged bond, the credit protection will be permitted to be recognised to a  maximum of 80% of the exposure hedged. Therefore, the NBFC will continue to  maintain capital charge for the corporate bond to the extent of 20% of the  applicable capital charge. This can be achieved by taking the exposure value at  20% of the market value of the bond and then multiplying that with the risk  weight of the issuing entity. In addition to this, the bought CDS position will  attract a capital charge for counterparty risk which will be calculated by  applying a credit conversion factor of 100 percent and a risk weight as  applicable to the protection seller i.e. 20 per cent for banks and 100 per cent  for others.
(ii) For corporate bonds held in permanent  category and hedged by CDS where there is no mismatch between the CDS and the  hedged bond, NBFCs can recognise full credit protection for the underlying  asset and no capital will be required to be maintained thereon. The exposure  will stand fully substituted by the exposure to the protection seller and  attract risk weight as applicable to the protection seller i.e. 20 per cent for  banks and 100 per cent for others.”
Loans  against non-banking financial company’s own shares prohibited
17. (1) No non-banking financial company shall lend  against its own shares.
(2) Any outstanding loan granted  by a non-banking financial company against its own shares on the date of  commencement of these Directions shall be recovered by the non-banking  financial company as per the repayment schedule.
32
[17A Loans against security of single product -  gold jewellery
(a) All NBFCs shall
33
[(i) maintain  a Loan-to-Value (LTV) Ratio not exceeding 75 per cent for loans granted against  the collateral of gold jewellery;
Provided that the value of gold jewellery for the purpose  of determining the maximum permissible loan amount shall be the intrinsic value  of the gold content therein and no other cost elements shall be added thereto.  The intrinsic value of the gold jewellery shall be arrived at as detailed in  paragraph 17C(1) of the Directions.]
(ii) disclose in their balance  sheet the percentage of such loans to their total assets.
(b) NBFCs should not grant any advance  against bullion / primary gold and gold coins. NBFCs primarily engaged in  lending against gold jewellery (such loans comprising 50 per cent or more of  their financial assets) shall maintain a minimum Tier I capital of 12 per cent  by April 1, 2014.)
34
[NBFCs  should not grant any advance for purchase of gold in any form including primary  gold, gold bullion, gold jewellery, gold coins, units of Exchange Traded Funds  (ETF) and units of gold mutual fund.]
35
[Verification of the Ownership of Gold
17B It  was stipulated
inter alia
that NBFCs  should have Board approved policies in place to confirm and satisfy ownership  of the gold jewellery and that adequate steps be taken to ensure that the KYC  guidelines stipulated by the Reserve Bank are followed to verify adequate due  diligence of the customer. In this  regard, it has been decided that where the gold jewellery pledged by a borrower  at any one time or cumulatively on loan outstanding is more than 20 grams, NBFCs must keep record of the verification of the  ownership of the jewellery.
36
The  ownership verification need not necessarily be through original receipts for  the jewellery pledged but a suitable document may be prepared to explain how  theownership was determined, particularly in each and  every case where the gold jewellery pledged by a borrower at any one time or  cumulatively on loan outstanding is more than 20 grams. NBFCs shall have an  explicit policy in this regard as approved by the Board in their overall loan  policy.
Standardization of Value of Gold accepted as collateral in arriving  at LTV Ratio
17C (1) The gold jewellery accepted as collateral by the Non-Banking  Financial Company shall be valued by following method
i. The gold jewellery  accepted as collateral by the Non-Banking Financial Company shall be valued by  taking into account the preceding 30 days’ average of the closing price of 22  carat gold as per the rate as quoted by  The Bombay Bullion Association Ltd. (BBA).
ii. If the gold is of  purity less than 22 carats, the NBFC should translate the collateral into 22  carat and state the exact grams of the collateral. In other words, jewellery  of lower purity of gold shall be valued proportionately.
iii. NBFC while accepting  the gold as collateral should give a certificate to the borrower on their  letterhead, of having assayed the gold and stating the purity (in terms of  carats) and the weight.
37
[NBFCs may have suitable  caveats to protect themselves against disputes during redemption, but the  certified purity shall be applied both for determining the maximum permissible  loan and the reserve price for auction.]
(2)  Auction
a. The auction should be conducted in the  same town or taluka in which the branch  that has extended the loan is located.
b. While  auctioning the gold the NBFC should declare a reserve price for the pledged  ornaments. The reserve price for the  pledged ornaments should not be less than 85% of the previous 30 day average  closing price of 22 carat gold as declared by The Bombay Bullion Association  Ltd. (BBA) and value of the jewellery of lower purity in terms of carats should  be proportionately reduced.
c. It  will be mandatory on the part of the NBFCs to provide full details of the value  fetched in the auction and the outstanding dues adjusted and any amount over  and above the loan outstanding should be payable to the borrower.
d. NBFCs  must disclose in their annual reports the details of the auctions conducted  during the financial year including the number of loan accounts, outstanding  amounts, value fetched and whether any of its sister concerns participated in  the auction.”
Safety and security measures to be followed by Non-Banking Financial  Companies lending against collateral of gold jewellery
17D (1) Non-Banking Financial Companies, which are in the business of  lending against collateral of gold jewellery, shall ensure that necessary  infrastructure and facilities are put in place, including safe deposit vault  and appropriate security measures for operating the vault, in each of its  branches where gold jewellery is accepted as collateral. This is to safeguard  the gold jewellery accepted as collateral and to ensure convenience of  borrowers.
(2) None new  branch/es shall be opened without suitable arrangements for security and for  storage of gold jewellery, including safe deposit vault.”
Opening Branches exceeding one thousand in number
17E It is henceforth mandatory for a Non-Banking Financial Company to  obtain prior approval of the Reserve Bank to open branches exceeding 1000.  However NBFCs which already have more than 1000 branches may approach the Bank  for prior approval for any further branch expansion. Besides, no new branches  will be allowed to be opened without the facilities for storage of gold  jewellery and minimum security facilities for the pledged gold jewellery.]
17 F.
38
Loans against security of shares - All NBFCs with asset size of
`
.100  crore and above shall,
(i) maintain a Loan to Value (LTV) ratio of 50% for loans granted against the  collateral of shares, and
(ii) accept only Group 1 securities (specified in SMD/Policy/Cir-9/2003 dated March 11, 2003 as amended from time to time, issued by SEBI) as  collateral for loans of value more than
`
.5  lakh, subject to review by the Bank.
Concentration  of credit/investment
18. (1) On and from April 1,  2007 no systemically important non-deposit taking non-banking  financial company shall,
(i) lend to
(a) any single borrower exceeding fifteen  per cent of its owned fund; and
(b) any single group of borrowers exceeding  twenty five per cent of its owned fund;
(ii) invest in
(a) the  shares of another company exceeding fifteen per cent of  its owned fund; and
(b) the  shares of a single group of companies exceeding twenty five per cent of its  owned fund;
(iii)  lend and invest  (loans/investments taken together) exceeding
(a) twenty five per cent of  its owned fund to a single party; and
(b)  forty per cent of its owned fund to a single group of parties.
Provided that the ceiling on the  investment in shares of another company shall not be applicable to a systemically important non-deposit taking non-banking  financial company in respect of investment in the equity capital of an  insurance company upto the extent specifically permitted, in writing, by the  Reserve Bank of India.
Provided
further that any systemically important non-deposit taking non-banking  financial company, classified as Asset Finance Company by the Reserve Bank of  India, may in exceptional circumstances, exceed the above ceilings on  credit / investment concentration to a  single party or a single group of parties by 5 per cent of its owned fund, with  the approval of its Board.
39
[Provided further that any systemically important non-deposit  taking non-banking financial company not accessing public funds, either  directly or indirectly, or not issuing guarantees may make an application to  the Bank for an appropriate dispensation consistent with the spirit of the  exposure limits.]
Explanation: "Public funds" for the purpose of  the proviso shall include funds raised  either directly or indirectly through public deposits, Commercial Papers,  debentures, inter-corporate deposits and bank finance.
(2)  Every systemically important non-deposit taking non-banking  financial company shall formulate a policy in respect of exposures to a single  party / a single group of parties.
(3)
40
[An  NBFC which is held by an NOFHC shall not
i. have any  exposure (credit and investments including investments in the equity / debt  capital instruments) to the Promoters/ Promoter Group entities or individuals  associated with the Promoter Group or the NOFHC;
ii. make  investment in the equity/ debt capital instruments in any of the financial  entities under the NOFHC;
iii. invest  in equity instruments of other NOFHCs.]
Explanation:  For the purposes of this Paragraph, the expression, 'Promoter' and 'Promoter  Group' shall have the meanings assigned to those expressions in
Annex 1
to the  "Guidelines for Licensing of New Banks in the Private Sector" issued  by Reserve Bank (
Annex III
).
Notes:
(1) For determining the limits, off-balance sheet  exposures shall be converted into credit risk by applying the conversion  factors as explained in paragraph 16.
(2) The investments in debentures for the  purposes specified in this paragraph shall be treated as credit and not  investment.
(3) These ceilings shall be applicable to the  credit/investment by such a non-  banking financial company to companies/firms in its own group as well as  to the borrowers/ investee company’s group.
Information in regard to change of address, directors,  auditors, etc. to be submitted
19. Every non-banking financial company not accepting/holding  public deposit shall communicate, not later than one month from the occurrence  of any change in:
the  complete postal address, telephone number/s and fax number/s of the  registered/corporate office;
the  names and residential addresses of the directors of the company;
the  names and the official designations of its  principal officers;
the  names and office address of the auditors of the company; and
the  specimen signatures of the officers authorised to sign on behalf of the company
to  the Regional Office of the Department of Non-Banking Supervision of the Reserve  Bank of India as indicated in the Second Schedule to the Non-Banking Financial  Companies Acceptance of Public Deposits (Reserve Bank) Directions, 1998.
41
[Requirements for Infrastructure Finance Company –
19A. An  Infrastructure Finance Company shall, -
(i) not accept deposits from the public;
(ii) have net owned funds of Rs. 300 crore or  above;
(iii)
42
[have  obtained a minimum credit rating 'A' or equivalent of CRISIL, FITCH, CARE,  ICRA, Brickwork Ratings India Pvt. Ltd. (Brickwork) or equivalent rating by any  other credit rating agency accredited by RBI]
(iv) have a CRAR  of 15 percent (with a minimum Tier I capital of 10 percent)].
Norms relating to Infrastructure loan
20. (1) Increase in exposure limits for  Infrastructure related loan and investment
The systemically important non-deposit taking non-banking financial  companies may exceed the concentration of credit/investment norms, as provided  in paragraph 18 of these Directions, by 5 per cent for any single party and by  10 per cent for a single group of parties, if the additional exposure is on  account of infrastructure loan and/ or investment.]
43
[(1A)  Infrastructure Finance Companies may exceed the concentration of credit norms  as provided in paragraph 18 of the aforesaid Directions,
(i)  in lending to:
(a) any single borrower, by ten per cent of its owned fund; and
(b) any single group of  borrowers, by fifteen per cent of its owned fund;
(ii)  in lending to and investing in, (loans/investments taken together)
(a) a single party, by five percent of its owned fund; and
(b) a  single group of parties, by ten percent  of its owned fund.]
(2)
Risk  weight for investment in AAA rated securitized paper
The  investment in “AAA” rated securitized paper pertaining to the infrastructure  facility shall attract risk weight of 50 per cent for capital adequacy purposes  subject to the fulfilment of the following conditions:
(i) The  infrastructure facility generates income / cash flows, which ensures servicing  / repayment of the securitized paper.
(ii) The  rating by one of the approved credit rating agencies is current and valid.
Explanation:
The rating relied upon shall be  deemed to be current and valid, if the rating is not more than one month old on  the date of opening of the issue, and the rating rationale from the rating  agency is not more than one year old on the date of opening of the issue, and  the rating letter and the rating rationale form part of the offer document.
(iii) In the case of secondary market  acquisition, the ‘AAA’ rating of the issue is in force and confirmed from the  monthly bulletin published by the respective rating agency.
(iv) The  securitized paper is a performing asset.
44
[(3)  For Infrastructure Finance Companies, the risk weight for assets covering PPP  and post commercial operations date (COD) projects which have completed at  least one year of satisfactory commercial operations shall be at 50 percent.]
NBFCs not to be partners in partnership firms
20A.
45
[(1)  No non-banking financial company shall contribute to the capital of a  partnership firm or become a partner of such firm.
(2) A non-banking financial company, which  had already contributed to the capital of a partnership firm or was a partner  of a partnership firm shall seek early retirement from the partnership firm.]
(3)
46
[In  this connection it is further clarified that;
a) Partnership firms mentioned above will also include Limited Liability  Partnerships (LLPs).
b) Further, the aforesaid prohibition will also be applicable with respect to  Association of persons; these being similar in nature to partnership firms
NBFCs which had  already contributed to the capital of a LLP / Association of persons or was a  partner of a LLP / Association of persons are advised to seek early retirement  from the LLP / Association of persons.]
47
[Norms for restructuring of advances
20B. Norms for  restructuring of advances by NBFCs shall be on the lines of the norms specified  by the Reserve Bank of India for banks as modified and set forth in
Annex-IV
.]
Exemptions
21. The Reserve Bank of India may, if it  considers it necessary for avoiding any hardship or for any other just and  sufficient reason, grant extension of time to comply with or exempt any  non-banking financial company or class of non-banking financial companies, from  all or any of the provisions of these Directions either generally or for any  specified period, subject to such conditions as the Reserve Bank of India may  impose.
Interpretations
22. For the purpose of giving effect to the  provisions of these Directions, the Reserve Bank of India may, if it considers  necessary, issue necessary clarifications in respect of any matter covered  herein and the interpretation of any provision of these Directions given by the  Reserve Bank of India shall be final and binding on all the parties concerned.
Repeal and  Saving
23. (1)  The Non-Banking Financial  Companies Prudential Norms (Reserve Bank) Directions, 1998 shall stand repealed  by these Directions.
(2) Notwithstanding such  repeal, any circular, instruction, order issued under the Directions in  sub–section (1) shall continue to apply to non-banking financial companies in  the same manner as they applied to such companies before such repeal.
Submission  of ‘Branch Info’ Return
24.
48
[With effect from June 30,  2013, all Non-deposit taking NBFCs having total assets more than Rs.50 crore,  shall submit a quarterly return on Branch Info within ten days of the expiry of  the relative quarter as on March 31, June 30 ,September 30 and December 31 every year, in thespecified  format available in the Annex , to the Regional Office of the Department  of Non-Banking Supervision of the Reserve Bank of India, under whose  jurisdiction the registered office of the company is located as per Second  Schedule to the Non-Banking Financial Companies Acceptance of Public Deposits  (Reserve Bank) Directions, 1998. The return shall be submitted online in the  format available on
https://cosmos.rbi.org.in
.]
(ii) The format of ‘Branch Info’ return is provided in
Annex II
(V.  Leeladhar)
Deputy Governor
Appendix
List of Circulars/Notifications
Sr. No.
Circular/Notification    No.
Date
1
Notification  No.DNBS.213/CGM(ASR)-2010
12-Feb-10
2
Notification No.DNBS.(PD)221/CGM(US)-2011
5-Jan-11
3
Notification DNBS.PD.No.235/CGM(US)-2011
2-Dec-11
4
Notification no.DNBS.254/CGM(CRS)-2012
28-Dec-12
5
Notification    No.DNBS.251/CGM(US)-2012
14-Sep-12
6
Notification    No.DNBS.(PD)202/CGM(PK)-2008
29-Oct-08
7
Notification    No.DNBS.223/CGM(US)-2011
17-Jan-11
8
Notification    No.DNBS.200/CGM(PK)-2008
1-Aug-08
9
Notification    No.DNBS.218/CGM(US)-2010
1-Dec-10
10
Notification    No.DNBS.209/CGM(ANR)-2009
22-Oct-09
11
Notification DNBS.PD.No.247/CGM(US)-2012
23-Jul-12
12
Notification    No.DNBS.206/CGM(ASR)-2009
26-May-09
13
Notification    No.DNBS.242/CGM(US)-2012
21-Mar-12
14
Notification DNBS.PD.No.238/CGM(US)-2011
26-Dec-11
15
Notification    No.DNBS(PD).249/CGM(US)-2012
1-Aug-12
16
Notification DNBS.PD.No.240/CGM(US)-2011
30-Dec-11
17
Notification    No.DNBS(PD).241/CGM(US)-2012
21-Mar-12
18
Notification    No.DNBS(PD).214/CGM(US)-2010
9-Jul-10
19
Notification    No.DNBS.(PD)244/CGM(US)-2012
11-May-12
20
Notification    No.DNBS(PD).246/CGM(US)-2012
30-May-12
21
Notification    no.DNBS.228/CGM(US)-2011
30-Mar-11
22
Notification    No.DNBS(PD).256/CGM(CRS)2013
11-Jun-13
23
Notification    No.DNBS.266/PCGM(NSV)-2013
29-Nov-13
24
Notification    No. DNBS.267/PCGM(NSV)-2014
1-Jan-14
25
Notification    No.DNBS(PD).270/PCGM(NSV)-2014
8-Jan-14
26
DNBS.CC.PD.No.326/03.10.01/2012-13
27-May-13
27
Notification    No 264 DNBS .PD
16-Sep-13
28
Notification    No. DNBS(PD).274/ CGM(NSV)-2014
7-Apr-14
29
Notification    No. DNBS(PD).256/CGM(CRS)2013
11-Jun-13
30
Notification    No DNBS(PD)No 272
23-Jan-14
31
Notification    No: DNBS (PD): 262 / 2013-14
3-Sep-13
32
Notification  No DNBS(PD)No 277
21-Aug-14
*
Government Companies were advised  vide
DNBS.PD/CC.No. 86/03.02.089/2006-07 dated December 12, 2006
to submit a road map  for compliance with the various elements of the NBFC regulations, in  consultation with the Government,  and submit the same to the Reserve Bank (Department of Non Banking Supervision  – (DNBS)
1
Inserted  vide
Notification  No. DNBS. 213/CGM(ASR)-2010 dated February 12, 2010
2
Inserted  vide
Notification  No. DNBS.(PD) 221/CGM(US)-2011  dated January 5, 2011
3
Inserted vide
Notification  DNBS.PD.No.235/CGM(US)-2011 dated December 02, 2011
4
Detailed  definition of Infrastructure Finance Company inserted vide
Notification No. DNBS. 213 / CGM(ASR)-2010 dated February 12, 2010
is as under: Infrastructure Finance Company” means a non deposit taking NBFC  that fulfills the criteria mentioned below:
i. a minimum of 75 per cent of  its total assets should be deployed in  infrastructure loans as defined in Para 2(viii) of the Non Banking Financial  (Non Deposit Accepting or Holding) Companies Prudential Norms (Reserve Bank)  Directions, 2007;
ii. Net owned funds of Rs. 300 crore or  above;
iii. minimum credit rating 'A' or  equivalent of CRISIL, FITCH, CARE, ICRA  or equivalent rating by any other  accrediting rating agencies;
iv. CRAR of 15 percent (with a minimum  Tier I capital of 10 percent).
5
Inserted  vide
Notification  No.DNBS.266/PCGM(NSV)-2013   dated November 29, 2013
6
Inserted vide
Notification  DNBS.PD.No.235/ CGM(US)-2011 dated December 02, 2011
7
Inserted vide
DNBS(PD)CC.No.300/03.10.038/2012-13  dated August 03, 2012
8
Inserted vide
Notification  No. DNBS. 251/CGM(US)-2012 dated September 14, 2012
9
Notification  No.DNBS.(PD)274/CGM(NSV)-2014 dated April 7, 2014
10
http://www.rbi.org.in/scripts/BS_PressReleaseDisplay.aspx?prid=28191
11
Inserted  vide
Notification  No.DNBS. (PD) 202/CGM(PK)-2008  dated October 29,2008
12
Inserted vide
Notification  No. DNBS.223/CGM(US)-2011 dated January 17, 2011
13
Inserted vide
Notification  No.DNBS. (PD) 202/CGM(PK)-2008 dated October 29,2008
14
Inserted vide
Notification  No. DNBS.267/PCGM(NSV)-2014 dated  January 1, 2014
15
Notification  No. DNBS.223/ CGM(US)-2011 dated January 17, 2011
16
Inserted vide
Notification  No. DNBS. 200/CGM(PK)-2008 dated  August 1,2008
17
Inserted  Vide
Notification  No. DNBS. 218/CGM(US)-2010 dated December 01, 2010
18
It was clarified in
DNBS  (PD) C.C. No. 81/03.05.002/2006-07 dated October 19, 2006
, that the business  of non-banking financial institution (NBFI) means a company engaged in the  business of financial institution as contained in Section  45I(a) of the RBI Act, 1934. For this purpose, the  definition of 'Principal Business' given, vide Press Release 1998-99/1269 dated April 8, 1999 may be followed.
19
Inserted  vide
Notification  No. DNBS. 209/CGM(ANR)-2009 dated  October 22, 2009
20
Inserted vide
Notification  DNBS.PD.No.235/CGM(US)-2011 dated December 02, 2011
21
Inserted  vide
Notification  DNBS.PD.No.247/CGM(US)-2012 dated July 23, 2012
22
Inserted  vide
Notification  No. DNBS. 206/CGM(ASR)-2009 dated May  26, 2009
23
Inserted  vide
Notification  No. DNBS.242/CGM(US)-2012 dated March 21, 2012
24
Deleted vide
Notification  No DNBS. PD.No.238/CGM(US)-2011 dated  December 26, 2011
25
Inserted vide
Notification  DNBS. PD. No. 267/PCGM(NSV) -2014 dated January 01, 2014
26
Inserted vide
Notification  DNBS. PD.No.238/CGM(US)-2011 dated December 26, 2011
27
Deleted vide
Notification  DNBS. PD.No.238/CGM(US)-2011 dated December 26, 2011
28
Deleted vide
Notification  No.DNBS(PD). 249/CGM(US)-2012 dated August 1 , 2012
29
Inserted vide
Notification  No.DNBS(PD). 249/CGM(US)-2012 dated August 1 , 2012
30
Inserted vide
Notification  No.DNBS(PD). 249/CGM(US)-2012 dated August 1, 2012
31
Inserted vide
Notification  DNBS. PD.No.240 / CGM(US)-2011 dated December 30, 2011
32
Inserted vide
Notification  No.DNBS(PD).241/ CGM(US)-2012 dated March 21, 2012
33
Substituted  vide
Notification  No.DNBS(PD).270/PCGM(NSV)-2014 dated January 08, 2014
34
Inserted  vide
DNBS.CC.PD.No.326/03.10.01/2012-13  May 27, 2013
35
Inserted  vide
Notification  No 264 DNBS .PD dated September 16, 2013
36
Substituted  vide
Notification  No 270 DNBS .PD dated January 08,2014
37
Inserted vide
Notification  No 270 DNBS .PD dated January 08,2014
38
Inserted vide
DNBS(PD).277/PCGM(KKV)/2014-15   August 21, 2014
39
Inserted  vide
Notification  No. DNBS(PD).214/ CGM(US)-2010 dated  July 09, 2010
40
Inserted  vide
Notification  No. DNBS(PD).274/ CGM(NSV)-2014 dated  April 7, 2014
41
Inserted  vide
Notification  No. DNBS. 213 / CGM(ASR)-2010 dated February 12, 2010
42
Inserted  vide
Notification  No. DNBS.(PD) 244 / CGM(US)-2012 dated May 11, 2012
43
Inserted  vide
Notification  No. DNBS. 213 / CGM(ASR)-2010 dated February 12, 2010
44
Inserted vide
Notification  No.DNBS(PD). 246 / CGM(US)-2012 dated May 30, 2012
45
Inserted vide
Notification  no. DNBS. 228 / CGM(US)-2011 dated March 30, 2011
46
Inserted vide
Notification  No. DNBS(PD).256/CGM(CRS)2013  dated June 11, 2013
47
Inserted  vide
Notification  No DNBS(PD)No 272 dated January 23, 2014
48
Inserted  vide
Notification  No: DNBS (PD): 262 / 2013-14 Dated September 03, 2013