(52 kb)
Know Your Customer (KYC) Norms / Anti-Money Laundering (AML) Standards /Combating of Financing of Terrorism (CFT) / Obligation of NBFCs under Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002- Clarification on proof of Address
RBI/2014-15/120
DNBS (PD).CC. No 398/03.10.42/2014-15
July 10,  2014
All Deposit taking Non  Banking Financial Companies
Dear Sirs,
Know  Your Customer (KYC) Norms / Anti-Money Laundering (AML) Standards /Combating of  Financing of Terrorism (CFT) / Obligation of NBFCs under Prevention of Money Laundering Act  (PMLA), 2002- Clarification on proof of Address
Please refer to paragraph I 8 and  Annex VIII of
Master Circular DNBS (PD) CC No.  387/03.10.42/ 2014-15 dated July 1, 2014
on Know Your Customer  (KYC) Norms / Anti-Money Laundering (AML) Standards/Combating of Financing of  Terrorism (CFT) / Obligation of banks under Prevention of Money Laundering Act  (PMLA), 2002 on Know Your Customer (KYC) Norms / Anti-Money Laundering (AML)  Standards / Combating of Financing of Terrorism (CFT) / Obligation of banks  under PMLA, 2002 regarding requirement of proof of address while opening  deposit account by individuals.
2. Reserve Bank has been receiving  representations / references from various quarters especially migrant workers,  transferred employees, etc. regarding problems faced in submitting a proof of  current / permanent address while opening a deposit account. The matter has  since been examined in the light of amendment to the Prevention of Money Laundering Rules  (Maintenance of Records), 2005, and accordingly it has been decided  to simplify the requirement of submission of 'proof of address' as follows :
a) Henceforth, customers may submit only one  documentary proof of address (either current or permanent) while opening a deposit  account or while undergoing periodic updation. In case  the address mentioned as per 'proof of address' undergoes a change, fresh proof  of address may be submitted to the NBFC within a period of six months.
b)  In case the proof of address furnished by the customer is not the local address  or address where the customer is currently residing, the NBFC may take a  declaration of the local address on which all correspondence will be made by  the NBFC with the customer. No proof is required to be submitted for such  address for correspondence/local address. This address may be verified by the NBFC  through 'positive confirmation' such as acknowledgment of receipt of (i) letter  (ii) telephonic conversation; (iii) visits; etc. In the event of change in this  address due to relocation or any other reason, customers may intimate the new  address for correspondence to the NBFC within two weeks of such a change.
3. Deposit taking NBFCs may revise their KYC policy in the light of the  above instructions and ensure strict adherence to the same.
Yours faithfully,
(Sindhu Pancholy)
Deputy General Manager
Encl: as  above