(372 kb)
Loans against Gold Ornaments and Jewellery for Non-Agricultural End-uses
RBI/2014-15/142
DBOD.No.BP.BC.27/21.04.048/2014-15
July 22, 2014
The Chairman and Managing Director/Chief  Executive Officer
All Scheduled Commercial Banks
(Excluding Local Area Banks and Regional Rural  Banks)
Madam/Dear Sir,
Loans against Gold  Ornaments and Jewellery for Non-Agricultural End-uses
Please refer to our circulars
DBOD.No.BP.79/21.04.048/2013-14  dated December 30, 2013
and
DBOD.BP.BC.No.86/21.01.023/2013-14  dated January 20, 2014
on the captioned subject.
2. We  have received representations from banks requesting to increase the prescribed  ceiling and to review other conditions applicable for non-agricultural loans  against pledge of gold ornaments and jewellery, where both interest and  principal are payable at maturity of the loan, especially in view of  introduction of Loan to Value (LTV) ceiling for such loans vide our circular  dated January 20, 2014. The issue was examined and it has now been decided that  loans extended against pledge of gold ornaments and jewellery, for other than agricultural  purposes, where both interest and principal are due for payment at maturity of  the loan will be subject to the following conditions:
Banks, as per their Board  approved policy, may decide upon the ceiling with regard to the quantum of loans  that may be granted against the pledge of gold jewellery and ornaments for  non-agricultural end uses;
The tenor of the loans shall  not exceed 12 months from the date of sanction;
Interest will be charged to  the account at monthly rests and may be recognised on accrual basis provided  the account is classified as ‘standard’ account. This will also apply to  existing loans;
Such loans shall be governed  by extant norms pertaining to income recognition, asset classification and  provisioning which shall be applicable once the principal and interest become  overdue.
3. In this connection, it is also clarified that  LTV of 75 per cent shall be maintained throughout the tenure of the loan for  all loans extended against pledge  of gold ornaments and jewellery for non-agricultural end uses. The LTV ratio  shall be computed against the total outstanding in the account, including  accrued interest, and current value of gold jewellery accepted as security / collateral, determined as per the  methodology prescribed in our circular dated January 20, 2014.
4. For the purpose of  valuation of gold, banks may use the  historical spot gold price data publicly disseminated by a commodity exchange  regulated by the Forward Markets Commission on a consistent manner as per their  Board approved policy, in addition to the prices disseminated by the India  Bullion and Jewellers Association Ltd.
Yours faithfully,
(Sudarshan Sen)
Chief General Manager-in-Charge