(74 kb)
Regulatory framework for SCs/RCs – Certain amendments
RBI/2014-2015/164
DNBS (PD) CC. No.41/SCRC/26.03.001/2014-2015
August 05 , 2014
The Chairman/ Managing  Director/ Chief Executive Officer
All registered  Securitisation Companies (SCs)/ Reconstruction Companies (RCs)
Dear Sir,
Regulatory  framework for SCs/RCs – Certain amendments
Please refer to “The Securitisation Companies and Reconstruction Companies (Reserve Bank)  Guidelines and Directions, 2003” dated April 23, 2003 (herein after called Directions).
2. In order to tone up the regulatory framework pertaining to SCs/RCs,  in the light of experience gained, it has been decided to make certain  modifications to the existing Directions as under:
Investment of SCs / RCs in Security  Receipts (SRs)
- At present, SCs/RCs have to  mandatorily invest and hold minimum 5% of the SRs issued by them against the  assets acquired on an ongoing basis. Henceforth, SCs/RCs shall, by transferring  funds, invest a minimum of 15% of the SRs of each class issued by them under  each scheme on an ongoing basis till the redemption of all the SRs issued under  such scheme.
More time for due diligence
- Before bidding for the stressed assets, SCs/RCs may  seek the auctioning banks to give adequate time, not less than 2 weeks, to conduct a meaningful due diligence  of the account by verifying the underlying assets.
Change in definition of Planning period
- Planning period will mean a  period not exceeding six months (instead of twelve months as at present) allowed  for SCs / RCs to formulate a plan for realization of non-performing assets of  the selling bank acquired for the purpose of reconstruction.
Valuation of SRs
-The initial valuation of  SRs should be done within a period not exceeding six months of acquiring the  underlying asset (instead of one year  as at present) to enable all the stake holders to  realistically assess the value of SRs at an earlier date.
Management  fees
- Management fees  should be calculated and charged as percentage of the net asset value (NAV) at  the lower end of the range of the NAV specified by the Credit Rating Agency (CRA) (rather  than on the outstanding value of SRs as at present), provided that the same is  not more than the acquisition value of the underlying asset. However, management fees are to be reckoned as a  percentage of the actual outstanding value of SRs, before the availability of  NAV of SRs.
Membership in Joint Lenders’ Forum (JLF)
- In terms of
Circular  DBOD.BP.BC.No.97/21.04.132/2013-14 dated Feb. 26, 2014
on ‘Framework for  Revitalising Distressed Assets in the Economy – Guidelines on Joint Lenders’  Forum (JLF) and Corrective Action Plan (CAP)’, the banks have been advised that  as soon as an account is reported by any of the lenders to ‘Central Repository  of Information on Large Credits’ (CRILC) as SMA-2, they should mandatorily form  a committee to be called JLF if the aggregate exposure (AE) [fund based and  non-fund based taken together] of lenders in that account is Rs 100 crore and  above. SCs/RCs also should be members of JLF and should be a part of the  process involving the JLF with reference to such stressed assets.
Reporting  to Indian Banks’ Association (IBA)
- In terms of the same  circular, banks are to report to IBA the details of the recalcitrant CAs,  Advocates and Valuers who have committed serious irregularities in course of  rendering their professional services. Likewise, the SCs / RCs are to report to  IBA the details of such CAs, Advocates and Valuers for placing it on the IBA  database of Third Party Entities involved in fraud. However, the SCs/RCs will  have to ensure that they follow meticulously the procedural guidelines issued  by IBA (Circ. No. RB-II/Fr./Gen/3/1331 dated August 27, 2009) and also give the  parties a fair opportunity to explain their position and justify their action  before reporting to IBA. If no reply / satisfactory clarification is received  from them within one month, the SCs/RCs may report their names to IBA. SCs / RCs should consider this aspect before assigning any work to such parties in  future.
Additional disclosure
i. At present  it is mandatory for the SCs / RCs to disclose in their balance sheet the value  of financial assets acquired during the financial year either on its own books or in the books of the  trust. In addition, SCs / RCs will have to mandatorily disclose the basis of  their valuation if the acquisition value of the assets is more than the Book  Value (the value of the assets as declared by the seller bank in the auction).  Similarly, SCs / RCs will have to disclose the details of the assets disposed  off (either by write off or by realisation) during the year at substantial  discount (say more than 20% of valuation as on the previous year end) and the  reasons therefor. SCs / RCs are, also, to  declare upfront the details of the assets where the value of the SRs has  declined substantially below the acquisition value.
ii. SCs / RCs should put up in their website the list of  wilful defaulters, (by adopting the process as defined in
DBOD  Master Circ. No. CID.BC.3/20.16.003/2014-15 dated July 1, 2014
) at  quarterly intervals. Further, in terms of
DNBS  (PD-SC/RC).CC.No.23/26.03.001/2010-11 November 25, 2010
, each SC / RC is required  to become a member of at least one credit information company (CIC) and provide to the CIC periodically accurate  data/history of the borrowers. In this case, also, they should furnish the data  of wilful defaulters to the CIC in which they are members.
3. SCs / RCs may  note the above instructions for meticulous compliance.
4. A
Notification DNBS (PD-SC/RC) No. 11  /PCGM (KKV)/-2014 dated August 05, 2014
amending ‘The Securitisation Companies  and Reconstruction Companies (Reserve Bank) Guidelines and Directions, 2003’ is enclosed.
Yours sincerely,
(K.K. Vohra)
Principal Chief General  Manager
Reserve Bank of India
Department of Non-Banking Supervision
Central Office
World Trade Centre
Mumbai 400 005
Notification DNBS(PD-SC/RC) No.11 / PCGM  (KKV)/-2014 dated August 05, 2014
The Reserve Bank of India, having  considered it necessary in the public interest, and being satisfied that, for  the purpose of enabling the Reserve Bank to regulate the financial system to  the advantage of the country and to prevent the affairs of any Securitisation Company (SC) or Reconstruction  Company (RC) from being conducted in a manner detrimental to the interest of  investors or in any manner prejudicial to the interest of such SC or RC, in  exercise of the powers conferred by Section 3, 9, 12 and 13 of the  Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of  Security Interest Act, 2002, hereby directs that ‘The Securitisation Companies  and Reconstruction Companies (Reserve Bank) Guidelines and Directions, 2003’  contained in
Notification No. DNBS 2/CGM(CSM) - 2003 dated April 23, 2003
(hereinafter called directions) shall stand amended with immediate effect, as  follows:-
2
.
Amendment of  paragraph 3
In clause (ix) for the words, “twelve months”, the  words, “six months”, shall be substituted.
3
.
Amendment of paragraph 5
For clauses (v) and (vi) the following new clause shall be  substituted
“(v) the Securitisation Company or Reconstruction Company shall, by  transferring funds, invest in the  security receipts of each class issued by the trust set up for the purpose of  securitisation, an amount not less than 15% under each scheme and shall  continue to hold the same on an ongoing basis till the redemption of all the  Security Receipts issued under such schemes.”
4.
Amendment of  paragraph 7(1)
After clause (iii),  the following clause (iv) shall be inserted:
“(iv) Before bidding for the stressed  assets, SCs/RCs may seek the auctioning banks to give adequate time, not less  than 2 weeks, to conduct a meaningful due diligence of the account by verifying  the underlying assets.”
5.
Amendment of  paragraph 14
In Clause (iii) the following shall be  inserted at the beginning.
“Management fees should  be calculated and charged as a percentage of the Net Asset Value (NAV) at the lower  end of the range of the NAV specified by the Credit Rating Agency (CRA) provided  that the same is not more than the acquisition value of the underlying asset.  However, management fees are to be  reckoned as a percentage of the actual outstanding value of SRs, before the  availability of NAV of SRs.”
6
.
Amendment of paragraph 15
After  clause (xi) the following new clauses shall be inserted.
“(xii) The basis of valuation of assets if the  acquisition value of the assets is more than the BV.
(xiii) The details of the assets disposed of (either by  write off or by realisation) during the year at a discount of more than 20% of  valuation as on the previous year end and the reasons therefor.
(xiv) The details of the  assets where the value of the SRs has declined more than 20% below the  acquisition value.”
7. Substitution of paragraph 20
:
For the existing paragraph 20 the following shall be  substituted.
“20. SCs/RCs shall place on their website the list  of willful defaulters, at quarterly intervals. Every SC / RC shall become a  member of at least one credit information company (CIC) and provide to such CIC  periodically accurate data / history of the borrowers and the data of wilful  defaulters.
8. Insertion of new paragraphs 22 and 23
After  paragraph 21, the following paragraphs shall be inserted
“22. Membership of Joint Lenders’ Forum (JLF)
SCs/RCs shall become members of JLF as described in
Circular DBOD.BP.BC.No.97/21.04.132/2013-14  dated Feb. 26, 2014
on ‘Framework for Revitalising Distressed Assets in the  Economy – Guidelines on Joint Lenders’ Forum (JLF) and Corrective Action Plan  (CAP)’ and shall be a part of the process involving the JLF with reference to  such stressed assets.
23.  Reporting to Indian Banks’ Association (IBA)
- The SCs / RCs shall report to IBA  the details of Chartered Accountants, Advocates and Valuers (who have committed  serious irregularities in the course of rendering their professional services)  for including in the IBA database of Third Party Entities involved in fraud.  However, the SCs/RCs will have to ensure that they follow meticulously the  procedural guidelines issued by IBA (Circ. No. RB-II/Fr./Gen/3/1331 dated  August 27, 2009) and also give the parties a fair opportunity to explain their  position and justify their action before reporting to IBA. If no  reply/satisfactory clarification is received from them within one month, the  SCs/RCs shall report their details to IBA. SCs/RCs should consider this aspect before assigning  any work to such parties in future.
9. Amendment of Guidance Notes for SC/RCs attached to the Directions
For the existing clause (vi) of paragraph 2 the following shall be substituted
:
“(vi) Every SC/RC shall obtain initial rating /  grading of SRs from an approved credit rating agency within a period of six  months from the date of acquisition of assets and declare forthwith, the Net  Asset Value of the security receipts issued by it. Thereafter, rating / grading  of SRs shall be got reviewed from an approved CRA as on June 30 and December 31 every year and  declare the NAV of SRs forthwith to enable the qualified institutional buyers  to value their investment in SRs. For arriving at NAV, SC/RC shall get the SRs  rated on 'recovery rating scale' and require the rating agencies to disclose  the rationale for rating.
(K K Vohra)
Principal  Chief General Manager