(47 kb)
Refinancing of ECB at lower all-in-cost – Simplification of procedure
RBI/2014-15/196
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No.21
August  27, 2014
To
All Category - I Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam / Sir,
Refinancing  of ECB at lower all-in-cost – Simplification of procedure
Attention  of Authorized Dealer Category - I (AD Category - I) banks is invited to
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 5 dated August 01, 2005
as amended from time to  time in terms of which refinancing of existing ECB by raising fresh ECB at  lower all-in-cost is permitted subject to the condition that the  outstanding maturity of the original loan is maintained. The cases, where the  Average Maturity Period (AMP) of the fresh ECB is more than the residual  maturity of existing ECB, are examined by the Reserve Bank under the approval  route.
2. On a review, it has been  decided to  simplify the procedure by delegating powers to the AD Category – I banks to  approve even those cases where the AMP of the fresh ECB is exceeding the  residual maturity of the existing ECB under the automatic route subject  to the following conditions:
Both  the existing and fresh ECBs should be in compliance with the applicable  guidelines;
All-in-cost  of fresh ECB should be less than that of the all-in-cost of existing ECB;
Consent  of the existing lender is available;
Refinancing  is to be undertaken before the maturity of the existing ECB;
Borrower  should not be in the default / Caution List of RBI and should not be under the  investigation of the Directorate of Enforcement (DoE);
Overseas  branches / subsidiaries of Indian banks will not be permitted to extend ECB for  refinancing an existing ECB; and
All  requirements in respect of reporting arrangements like filing of revised Form  83, etc. are followed.
3. This  facility will be available even in those cases where existing ECBs were raised  under the approval route subject to the amount of new ECBs being eligible to be  raised under the automatic route.
4. All  other aspects of the ECB policy like eligible borrower, recognized lender,  permitted end-use, amount of ECB, all-in-cost, average maturity period,  reporting arrangements, etc. shall remain unchanged.
5.  The modification to the ECB policy will come into force with immediate effect.
6.  AD Category - I banks may bring the contents of this circular to the notice of  their constituents and customers.
7.  The directions contained in this circular have been issued under sections 10(4)  and 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and are  without prejudice to permissions / approvals, if any, required under any other  law.
Yours  faithfully
(B. P. Kanungo)
Principal  Chief General Manager