(47 kb)
Three divisions of Foreign Exchange Department shifted to FED CO Cell at New Delhi
RBI/2014-15/204
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No.23
September 2, 2014
To
All Category - I Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam / Sir,
Three  divisions of Foreign Exchange Department shifted to
FED  CO Cell at New Delhi
Attention  of Authorised Dealer Category-I (AD Category-I) banks is invited to the
Press  Release
dated June 17, 2014
which mentions the shifting of three  divisions of Foreign Investment Division (FID) viz. Liaison/Branch/Project  Office (LO/BO/PO) Division, Non Resident Foreign Account Division (NRFAD) and  Immovable Property (IP) Division to New Delhi with effect from July 15, 2014.  The address for correspondence for the three divisions is FED, CO Cell, Foreign  Exchange Department, Reserve Bank of India, New Delhi Regional Office, 6,  Parliament Street, New Delhi - 110 001, India.
2.  Attention is also invited to
A.P  (DIR Series) Circular No 106 dated February 18, 2014
in terms of which AD -  Category I banks are required to furnish on a monthly basis, a statement on the  number of applicants and total amount remitted from NRO account, as per  proforma annexed, to the Chief General Manager-in-Charge, Foreign Exchange  Department, Foreign Investments Division (NRFAD), Reserve Bank of India,  Central Office, Mumbai-400001 within 7 days of the end of the reporting  month.
3.  Attention is also invited to Para 5(ii) and Para 5(iii) of
A.P  (DIR Series) Circular No 24 dated December 30, 2009
in terms of which A.D  Category-I banks are required to report (i) the extension of validity of the  Liaison Offices to the Regional Office concerned as well as to the Central  Office, and (ii) closure of the Liaison Offices to the concerned Regional  Office and closure of Branch Offices to the Central Office.
4. It is  advised that all cases pertaining to these three divisions and the monthly  statements as per circulars ibid/reporting for extension or closure of LOs/BOs  shall be sent to the FED CO Cell at the address mentioned above. Reporting, by  email, for NRFAD shall continue at the same email address.
5. AD  Category- I banks may bring the contents of the circular to the notice of their  constituents concerned.
6. The  directions contained in this circular have been issued under Sections 10(4) and  11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and is without  prejudice to permissions / approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours  faithfully,
(C  D Srinivasan)
Chief  General Manager