(34 kb)
Know Your Customer (KYC) Norms /Anti-Money Laundering (AML) Standards/ Combating of Financing of Terrorism (CFT)/Obligation of banks under Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002 Obligation of banks – Client Due Diligence measures
RBI/2014-15/212
DBOD.AML.BC.No. 39/14.01.001/2014-15
September  4, 2014
The Chairperson/Chief  Executive Officers
All Scheduled Commercial Banks (excluding RRBs) /
All India Financial Institutions/ Local Area Banks
Dear  Madam/Sir,
Know Your  Customer (KYC) Norms /Anti-Money Laundering (AML) Standards/ Combating of  Financing of Terrorism (CFT)/Obligation of banks under Prevention of Money  Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002 Obligation of banks – Client Due Diligence measures
Please refer  to
paragraph  2
of our Master Circular DBOD.AML.BC.No.22/14.01.001/ 2014-15 July 1, 2014,  as per which banks are required to:
Undertake  client due diligence measures while commencing an account-based relationship.  Such measures include identifying and verifying the customer and beneficial  owner on the basis of reliable and independent information and data or  documentation.
Apply client due diligence measures to  existing clients at an interval of two/eight/ten years in respect of high/medium/low  risk clients respectively.
Carry out ongoing due diligence of  existing clients in order to ensure that their transactions are consistent with  the bank’s knowledge of the client, his business and risk profile and where  necessary, the source of funds.
Obtain ‘positive confirmation’ at two/three  years in respect of medium and low risk customers respectively.
2. 
          Taking  into account the feedback received in this regard and keeping in view the  provisions of the PML Rules, the matter has been reviewed. Accordingly, it is  advised that while the requirements of client due diligence measures applied when  establishing an account-based relationship and on-going due diligence would  continue as indicated at paragraph 1(i) to 1(iii) above, it has been decided to  dispense with the requirement of ‘positive confirmation’ as indicated at  paragraph 1(iv) above.
3. Further, the requirement of applying client  due diligence measures to existing clients at an interval of two/eight/ten  years in respect of high/medium/low risk clients respectively, would also  continue taking into account whether and when client due diligence measures  have previously been undertaken and the adequacy of data obtained. Physical  presence of the clients may, however, not be insisted upon at the time of such  periodic updations.
4. Banks  may revise their KYC policy in the light of the above instructions and ensure  strict adherence to the same.
Yours faithfully
(Lily Vadera)
Chief General  Manager