(90 kb)
Guidelines on Wilful Defaulters – Clarification regarding Guarantor, Lender and Unit
RBI/2014-15/221
DBOD.No.CID. 41/20.16.003/2014-15
September 9, 2014
All Scheduled Commercial Banks (excluding  RRBs and LABs) and
All India Notified Financial Institutions (FIs)
Dear Sir/ Madam
Guidelines  on Wilful Defaulters –
Clarification  regarding Guarantor, Lender and Unit
Please refer to the
Master  Circular on Wilful Defaulters DBOD.No.CID.BC.3/20.16.003/2014-15 dated July 1,  2014
.
2. Paragraph 2.1 of the circular lists out  various events when a “wilful default” would be deemed to have occurred. In  view of references received from a few banks regarding scope/definition of  “wilful default”, it is clarified as follows:
The term ‘lender’ appearing in the  circular covers all banks/FIs to which any amount is due, provided it is arising on account of any  banking transaction, including off balance sheet transactions such as  derivatives, guarantee and Letter of Credit.
The term ‘unit’ appearing therein has  to be taken to include individuals, juristic persons and all other forms of  business enterprises, whether incorporated or not. In case of business  enterprises (other than companies), banks/FIs may also report (in the Director  column) the names of those persons who are in charge and responsible for the  management of the affairs of the business enterprise.
3.  Paragraph 2.6 of the circular is amended to read as follows:
“While dealing with wilful default of a single  borrowing company in a Group, the banks /FIs should consider the track record  of the individual company, with reference to its repayment performance to its  lenders. However, in cases where guarantees furnished by the companies within  the Group on behalf of the wilfully defaulting units are not honoured when invoked  by the banks /FIs, such Group companies should also be reckoned as wilful  defaulters”.
4. In connection with  the guarantors, banks have raised queries regarding inclusion of names of  guarantors who are either individuals (not being directors of the company) or  non-group corporates in the list of wilful defaulters. It is advised that in  terms of Section 128 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, the liability of the  surety is co-extensive with that of the principal debtor unless it is otherwise  provided by the contract. Therefore,  when a default is made in making repayment by the principal debtor, the banker  will be able to proceed against the guarantor/surety even without exhausting  the remedies against the principal debtor.  As such, where a banker has made a claim on the guarantor on account of  the default made by the principal debtor, the liability of the guarantor is  immediate. In case the said guarantor refuses to comply with the demand made by  the creditor/banker, despite having sufficient means to make payment of the  dues, such guarantor would also be treated as a wilful defaulter. It is  clarified that this would apply only prospectively and not to cases where  guarantees were taken prior to this circular. Banks/FIs may ensure that this  position is made known to all prospective guarantors at the time of accepting  guarantees.
5. Banks/FIs may take due care  to follow the provisions set out in paragraph 3 of the Master Circular on  Wilful Defaulters dated July 1, 2014 in  identifying and reporting instances of wilful default in respect of guarantors also. While reporting such names to RBI, banks/FIs  may include “Guar” in brackets i.e. (Guar) against the name of the guarantor and  report the same in the Director column.
6. This circular is issued in exercise of the powers  conferred upon Reserve Bank of India under Section 35A of the Banking  Regulation Act, 1949.
Yours faithfully
(A  K Pandey)
Chief General Manager