(73 kb)
Fourth Bi-monthly Monetary Policy for 2014-15 Introduction of Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) for Scheduled Urban Cooperative Banks
RBI/2014-15/279
UBD.BPD.(SCB).Cir.No.1/16.27.000/2014-15
October 29, 2014
The Chief Executive Officers of
All Scheduled Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks
Dear Sir / Madam,
Fourth Bi-monthly Monetary  Policy for 2014-15
Introduction of Liquidity  Adjustment Facility (LAF) for Scheduled Urban Cooperative Banks
Please refer to para  24 of Fourth Bi-Monthly Monetary Policy  Statement 2014-15 (
extract appended
) by Reserve Bank of India on September 30, 2014 on the  captioned subject.
2. In order to  provide an additional avenue for liquidity management to Scheduled Urban  Co-operative Banks (UCBs), it has been decided that, with effect from November  28, 2014, Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) will be extended to Scheduled  UCBs which are CBS enabled, have CRAR of at least 9 per cent and are fully  compliant with the eligibility criteria prescribed for LAF. The terms and  conditions for availing LAF including minimum bid size prescription etc would  be as per the instructions issued by Financial Markets Department (FMD)of the  Reserve Bank of India  from time to time.
3. The names of UCBs  which meet the eligibility norms to participate in LAF (Positive List) those of  UCBs found ineligible (Negative List) will be communicated shortly to the FMD  by Urban Banks Department (UBD) under intimation to the banks concerned.
4. The eligibility  status of the banks in the Positive List will be reviewed on an ongoing basis  to ensure that the financial parameters are being complied with at all times.  However, additions to the Positive List will be considered annually around the  first week of January based on the financial position for the immediate  preceding financial year as assessed by the Reserve Bank’s Inspection.
Yours faithfully,
(Suma  Varma)
Chief  General Manager
Fourth  Bi-monthly Monetary Policy for 2014-15 (para 24)
24. As part of the Reserve  Bank’s continuous engagement in broadening and deepening financial markets, it  has been decided to:
allow access to the liquidity adjustment       facility (LAF) to scheduled urban co-operative banks (UCBs) in order to       provide them an additional avenue for liquidity management, provided they       fully comply with the eligible criteria prescribed for participation in       the LAF including having current accounts and SGL accounts with Reserve       Bank, Mumbai, the minimum bid size prescription and the like.
Detailed guidelines will be  issued separately by mid-October 2014.