(120 kb)
RRBs - Financial Inclusion by Extension of Banking Services - Use of Business Correspondents
RBI/2014-15/281
RPCD.CO.RRB.BC.No.  38 /03.05.33/2014-15
October 29, 2014
All Regional Rural Banks
Dear Sir/Madam,
Financial Inclusion  by Extension of Banking Services –
Use of Business Correspondents
Please refer to
paragraph 26
of the First Bi-monthly Monetary Policy  Statement, 2014-15 announced on April 1, 2014 which stated that “
On financial inclusion, the fourth pillar, the  recommendations of the Mor Committee on accelerating the flow of credit to  those at the bottom of the pyramid and enlargement of catchment area of the  Business Correspondents (BCs), including through possible inclusion of new  entities as BCs, are under examination”.
2. Taking into account the recommendations  of the Mor Committee, the existing guidelines on appointment of Business  Correspondents (BCs) have been reviewed as under:
i) Eligible individuals/entities
It has been decided that RRBs will be  permitted to engage non-deposit taking NBFCs (NBFCs-ND) as Business Correspondents,  subject to the following conditions:
a) It should be ensured that there is no  comingling of bank funds and those of the NBFC-ND appointed as BC.
b) There should be a specific contractual  arrangement between the RRB and the NBFC-ND to ensure that all possible  conflicts of interest are adequately taken care of.
c) RRBs  should ensure that the NBFC-ND does not adopt any restrictive practice such as  offering savings or remittance functions only to its own customers and forced  bundling of services offered by the NBFC-ND and the RRB  does not take place.
d) RRBs may be guided by our circular  RPCD.No.RRB.BC.25/03.05.34/98-99 dated September 15, 1998 on Financial  Assistance to NBFCs – Surplus Non-SLR Funds (
copy enclosed
).
ii) Distance criteria
In terms of
circular DBOD No BL BC 43/22.01.009/2010-11 dated September 28,  2010
, with a view to ensuring adequate supervision over the operations and  activities of the retail outlet/sub-agent of BCs by banks, every retail  outlet/sub-agent of BC is required to be attached to and be under the oversight  of a specific bank branch designated as the base branch and the distance between  the place of business of a retail outlet/sub-agent of BC and the base branch  should ordinarily not exceed 30 kms in rural, semi-urban and urban areas and 5  kms in metropolitan centres. In case there is a need to relax the distance  criterion, the District Consultative Committee (DCC)/State level Bankers  Committee (SLBC) could consider and approve relaxation on merits in respect of  under-banked areas etc. With a view to providing operational flexibility to RRBs  and in view of the technological developments in the banking sector, it has  been decided to remove the stipulation regarding distance criteria. The RRBs should,  however, while formulating the Board approved policy for engaging BCs, keep in  mind their notified area of operations and the objectives of adequate oversight  of the BCs as well as provision of services to customers while deciding how to  modify extant distance criteria.
3. RRBs may continue to take measures to  address possible reputational risks arising out of appointment and functioning  of BCs.
4.  All other instructions regarding the BC model will remain unchanged.
Yours faithfully,
(A.Udgata)
Principal  Chief General Manager