(44 kb)
Routing of funds raised abroad to India
RBI/2014-15/316
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 41
November 25, 2014
To
All Category – I Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam/ Sir,
Routing of funds raised abroad to India
Attention of Authorised Dealers – Category - I (AD  Category – I) banks is invited to the extant regulatory framework under the  Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA), 1999 related to the External Commercial  Borrowings (ECB), issuance of guarantees, and overseas direct investment from  India.
2. It has come to our notice that some Indian  companies are accessing overseas market for debt funds through overseas holding  / associate / subsidiary / group companies. It has also been reported that such  borrowings are raised at rates exceeding the ceiling applicable in terms of  extant FEMA regulations and that the funds so raised are routed to the Indian  companies which accounts for sole/major operations of the group. Different  modalities/structures are resorted to for channeling such funds for Indian  operations including investment in rupee bonds floated by the Indian company.
3. On a review of the matter in light of the existing  regulatory framework, it is clarified as under:
Indian companies or their AD Category – I banks are  not allowed to issue any direct or indirect guarantee or create any contingent  liability or offer any security in any form for such borrowings by their  overseas holding / associate / subsidiary / group companies except for the  purposes explicitly permitted in the relevant Regulations.
Further, funds raised abroad by overseas holding /  associate / subsidiary / group companies of Indian companies with support of  the Indian companies or their AD Category – I banks as mentioned at (i) above  cannot be used in India unless it conforms to the general or specific  permission granted under the relevant Regulations.
Indian companies or their AD Category – I banks using  or establishing structures which contravene the above shall render themselves  liable for penal action as prescribed under FEMA, 1999.
4. AD Category – I banks may bring the contents of  this Circular to the notice of their constituents and customers.
5. The directions contained in the Circular have been  issued under sections 10(4) and 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act,  1999 (42 of 1999) and are without prejudice to permissions / approvals  required, if any, under any other law.
Yours faithfully
B P  Kanungo
Principal  Chief General Manager