(204 kb)
Supervisory Action Framework for Urban Co-operative Banks (UCBs)
RBI/2014-15/323
DCBR.BPD.(PCB).Cir No.3/12.05.001/2014-15
November 27, 2014
The Chief Executive  Officers
All Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks
Madam/Dear Sir,
Supervisory  Action Framework for Urban Co-operative Banks (UCBs)
Please refer to
circular  UBD.BPD.(PCB).Cir.No.22/12.05.001/2011-12 dated March 01, 2012
in terms of which  Supervisory Action Framework (SAF) for UCBs was introduced. Having regard to the improvements witnessed  by the sector and the need for ensuring more timely supervisory responses, it  has been decided to review and revise the supervisory action framework. The  main features of this revision are as indicated herein below:-
1. Self Corrective  Action by UCBs:
The triggers for some  of the supervisory/regulatory actions have been revised and advanced to  facilitate early rectification of the irregularities/deficiencies by the bank.  The corrective action to be taken by UCBs in respect of different trigger points  includes the following:-
Gross NPAs exceeds 10% of the advances or  incremental gross NPAs of 3 percentage points each during the last two  consecutive years, whichever is earlier:
UCB would be required to furnish an action plan for recovery  of NPAs and to undertake special drive to reduce the stock of NPAs and contain  generation of fresh NPAs. The Board of the UCB would review its loan policy,  take steps to upgrade credit appraisal skills, strengthen follow-up of advances  including loan review mechanism for large loans, follow-up suit filed/decreed  debts effectively. The Board would review  top 50 NPA accounts monthly.
CD Ratio:
UCBs  are required to take corrective action in case CD ratio exceeds 70%. In case  the CD ratio is 80% and above, the UCB will be advised not to increase its  advances portfolio beyond the level as on a specified date and invest its  surplus funds in liquid assets without compromising on CRR/SLR requirements and  other restrictions.
In  this connection, the  national /state Federations had represented to Reserve Bank that the earlier  methodology of calculating CD ratio constricted their ability to expand credit  even while they had long term funds for lending, without attracting action  under SAF. To address the concern of the Federations, it has been decided that  the CD ratio for the purpose of SAF would be computed by reducing  from credit the provision held by a UCB for bad and doubtful debts and the sums  lent out of the financial assistance if any provided by State/Central  Government and Federations of UCBs/refinance availed from NHB/SIDBI etc.
Profitability:
If the UCB has incurred losses for two consecutive years or is having accumulated losses, it will be required  to submit an action plan within a month of receipt of our letter for making the  operations profitable. The UCB will be advised not to access/renew high cost  deposits, to contain administrative expenses, launch special drive to reduce  the stock of NPAs and contain generation of fresh NPAs, rationalise its  branches and close down loss making branches.
Capital Funds:
In case the bank’s capital slips to below the  regulatory capital of 9%, UCB will  be advised to submit an action plan within a month of receipt of our letter for  augmenting capital, specifically indicating the manner in which the capital  would be increased either by fresh infusion, conversion of deposits into equity  or by issue of LTDs, IPDI for improving CRAR to 9% within three months. UCB  would be advised to reduce its exposure to the sensitive sectors like capital  market, real estate, non-SLR investments and not to mobilise high cost deposits  and raise resources at market related rates and review its credit /investment  policy. In case CRAR of UCB is less than 3%, UCB will have to explore options  for merger.
2. Regulatory Action by Reserve Bank:
In tune with the general approach to facilitate  early rectification of the deficiencies, regulatory action to deal with UCBs which are  having negative networth such as prohibiting premature withdrawal of deposits  including by way of loans against deposits, imposition of all inclusive  directions under Section 35 A of BR Act, 1949 (AACS) and issue of show cause  notice for cancellation of license will also be advanced with a view to  facilitating less disruptive exit of such UCB.
3. Date of Applicability of Revised SAF:
The revised  supervisory action framework will be generally implemented based on the  findings of inspection conducted with reference to March 31, 2014. The  individual UCB will be advised of the specific action under SAF proposed to be  taken against the bank concerned based on the current assessment of the  financials and the corrective action they need to take to improve the financial  position.
4.
With the revision of SAF as above it is expected that  the Board of Directors of UCBs will be proactive in identifying the  shortcomings/deficiencies in the functioning of the bank and taking timely  action to address them so that the need to take stern regulatory action by  Reserve Bank is minimised.
5.
A copy of this circular may be placed in the next  meeting of the Board of Directors and a confirmation to that effect should be  sent to the Regional Office concerned.
Yours faithfully
(Suma Varma)
Principal Chief General Manager