(67 kb)
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in India – Review of FDI policy – Sector Specific conditions- Railway Infrastructure
RBI/2014-15/341
A.P.(DIR Series) Circular No.47
December  8, 2014
To
All  Category – I Authorised Dealer banks
Madam/Sir,
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in India – Review of FDI  policy – Sector Specific conditions- Railway Infrastructure
Attention of Authorised  Dealer Category – I (AD Category-I) banks is invited to Annex A and Annex  B of Schedule 1 to the Foreign Exchange  Management (Transfer or Issue of Security by a Person Resident outside India)  Regulations, 2000 notified vide
Notification  No. FEMA 20/2000-RB dated May 3, 2000
, as amended from time to time. In  terms of Annex A of Schedule 1 to the Notification ibid, Foreign Direct  Investment (FDI) is prohibited in activities / sectors not open to private  sector investment e.g. Atomic Energy and Railway Transport (other than Mass  Rapid Transport Systems).
2.  The extant Foreign Direct Investment  (FDI) policy for railways sector has since been reviewed. Department of  Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP) has now permitted 100% FDI in railway  Infrastructure sector under automatic route subject to conditions. Accordingly,  it has been decided to permit FDI in the following activities of the Railway  Transport sector:
“Construction,  operation and maintenance of the following: (i) Suburban corridor projects  through PPP, (ii) High speed train projects, (iii) Dedicated freight lines,  (iv) Rolling stock including train sets, and locomotives/coaches manufacturing  and maintenance facilities, (v) Railway Electrification, (vi) Signaling systems,  (vii) Freight  
        terminals,  (viii) Passenger terminals, (ix) Infrastructure in industrial park pertaining  to railway line/sidings including electrified railway lines and connectivities  to main railway line and (x) Mass Rapid Transport Systems. Further, FDI beyond  49 of the equity of the investee company in sensitive areas from security point  of view will be brought before the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) for  consideration on a case to case basis.”
3.  A copy of Press Note No. 8  (2014 Series) dated August 27, 2014 issued in this regard by DIPP, Ministry of  Commerce & Industry, Government of India is enclosed.
4. Reserve Bank has since amended the Principal Regulations through the  Foreign Exchange Management (Transfer or Issue of Security by a Person Resident  outside India) (Fourteenth Amendment) Regulations, 2014 notified vide
Notification  No. FEMA.320/2014-RB dated September 5, 2014
, c.f. G.S.R. No. 800(E)  dated November 13, 2014.
5.  Authorised Dealer banks may bring the contents of this circular to the  notice of their constituents and customers concerned.
6. The  directions contained in this circular have been issued under sections 10(4) and  11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and are without  prejudice to permissions / approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(B.P. Kanungo)
Principal Chief General Manager