(53 kb)
Levy of Penal Charges on Non-maintenance of Minimum Balances in Savings Bank Accounts
RBI/2014-15/349
DCBR.BPD (PCB/RCB) Cir. No. 3/12.05.001/2014-15
December 12, 2014
The Chief Executive Officer
All Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks /
State and Central Co-operative Banks (St CBs  / CCBs)
Madam / Dear  Sir,
Levy of Penal Charges on Non-maintenance of Minimum Balances  in Savings Bank Accounts
Please refer to UBD
circular  UBD.PCB.Cir.No.15/12.05.001/2008-09 dated September 18, 2008
on ‘Display of  information relating to interest rate and service charges’ and RPCD
Circular  RPCD.CO. RCB. BC. No.  36/07.51.010/2014-15 dated October  22, 2014
on ‘Customer Service in State /District Central  Co-operative Banks’ advising Primary  (Urban) Cooperative Banks and State and  Central Co-operative Banks to display information relating to  interest rates and service charges including minimum balance in savings bank  account in a prescribed format in their premises as well as websites.
2. In this connection, a reference is invited to
paragraph  30
of Part B of First Bi-monthly Monetary Policy Statement, 2014-15  announced on April 1, 2014, regarding 'Developmental and Regulatory Policies'  proposing certain measures towards consumer protection. One of the proposals  contained therein was that banks should not take undue advantage of customer  difficulty or inattention. Instead of levying penal charges for non-maintenance  of minimum balance in ordinary savings bank accounts, banks should limit  services available on such accounts to those available to Basic Savings Bank  Deposit Accounts and restore the services when the balances improve to the  minimum required level. A reference is also invited to the recommendations of  Damodaran Committee on customer service in banks which, inter-alia, recommended  that 'banks should inform the customer immediately on the balance in the account breaching  minimum balance and the applicable penal charges for not maintaining the  balance by SMS / Email / letter. Further, the penal charges levied should be in  proportion to the shortfall observed'.
3. Taking into consideration the  recommendations of Damodaran Committee and in the interest of customers, it has  been decided that while levying charges for non-maintenance of minimum balance  in savings bank account, Primary (Urban) Cooperative Banks and  State and Central Co-operative Banks shall adhere to the  additional guidelines given in the
Annex
. The guidelines will come into effect  from April 1, 2015.
4. These guidelines should be brought  to the notice of all customers apart from being disclosed on the bank's  website.
5. In the meantime, all banks are  advised to take immediate steps to update customer information so as to  facilitate sending alerts through electronic modes (SMSs / emails etc) for  effective implementation of the guidelines.
Yours faithfully,
(Suma Varma)
Principal Chief General Manager
Annex
Levy of charges for non-maintenance of minimum  balance in savings bank account shall be subject to the following additional  guidelines :
i) In the event of a default in maintenance of  minimum balance / average minimum balance as agreed to between the bank and  customer, the bank should notify the customer clearly by SMS / email / letter  etc. that in the event of the minimum balance not being restored in the account  within a month from the date of notice, penal charges will be applicable.
ii) In case the minimum balance is not restored  within a reasonable period, which shall not be less than one month from the  date of notice of shortfall, penal charges may be recovered under intimation to  the account holder.
iii) The policy on penal charges to be so levied may  be decided with the approval of the Board of the bank.
iv) The penal charges should be directly  proportionate to the extent of shortfall observed. In other words, the charges  should be a fixed percentage levied on the amount of difference between the  actual balance maintained and the minimum balance as agreed upon at the time of  opening of account. A suitable slab structure for recovery of charges may be  finalized.
v) It should be ensured that such penal charges are  reasonable and not out of line with the average cost of providing the services.
vi) It should be ensured that the balance in the  savings account does not turn into negative balance solely on account of levy  of charges for non-maintenance of minimum balance.