(30 kb)
Exim Bank's Line of Credit of USD 120.05 million to the Government of the Republic of Rwanda
RBI/2014-15/369
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.52
December 29, 2014
To
All Category - I Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam / Sir,
Exim Bank's Line of Credit of USD  120.05 million
to the Government of the Republic   of Rwanda
Export-Import Bank of India (Exim Bank) has entered into an Agreement  dated October 26, 2013 with the Government of the Republic of Rwanda for making available to the latter, a  Line of Credit (LOC) of USD 120.05 million (USD One Hundred and Twenty million  and fifty thousand) for financing [i] Export Targeted Modern Irrigated  Agricultural Project (USD 60.22 million); and [ii] Extension of Export Targeted  Modern Irrigated Agricultural Project (USD 59.83 million). The goods,  machinery, equipment and services including consultancy services from India  for exports under this Agreement are those which are eligible for export under  the Foreign Trade Policy of the Government of India and whose purchase may be  agreed to be financed by the Exim Bank under this Agreement. Out of the total  credit by Exim Bank under this Agreement, the goods and services including  consultancy services of the value of at least 75 per cent of the contract price  shall be supplied by the seller from India and the remaining 25 percent goods  and services may be procured by the seller for the purpose of Eligible Contract  from outside India.
2. The Credit Agreement under the LOC is  effective from December 2, 2014 and the date of execution of Agreement is  October 26, 2013. Under the LOC, the last date for opening of Letters of Credit  and Disbursement will be 48 months from the scheduled completion date of contract  in the case of project exports and 72  months (October 25, 2019) from the execution date of the Credit Agreement in  the case of supply contracts.
3. Shipments under the LOC will have to be  declared on GR / SDF Forms as per instructions issued by the Reserve Bank from  time to time.
4. No agency commission is payable under the  above LOC. However, if required, the exporter may use his own resources or  utilize balances in his Exchange Earners’ Foreign Currency Account for payment  of commission in free foreign exchange. Authorised Dealer Category- l (AD  Category-l) banks may allow such remittance after realization of full payment  of contract value subject to compliance with the prevailing instructions for  payment of agency commission.
5.  AD  Category-I banks may bring the contents of  this circular to the notice of their exporter constituents and advise them to  obtain full details of the Line of Credit from the Exim Bank’s office at Centre  One, Floor 21, World Trade Centre Complex, Cuffe Parade, Mumbai 400 005 or log on to
www.eximbankindia.in
.
6.  The Directions contained in this circular have been issued under  sections 10(4) and 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA), 1999  (42 of 1999) and are without prejudice to permissions / approvals, if any,  required under any other law.
Yours  faithfully,
(C. D. Srinivasan)
Chief General Manager