(35 kb)
Security for External Commercial Borrowings
RBI/2014-15/377
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 55
January  01, 2015
To
All  Authorised Dealer Category-I Banks
Madam/  Sir
Security  for External Commercial Borrowings
Attention  of Authorised Dealers Category-I (AD Category-I) banks is invited to Paragraphs  1 (A)(vii) and 1 (B) (vi) of
Annex  to A P (DIR Series) Circular No. 5 dated August 1, 2005
and
A P  (DIR Series) Circular No. 1 dated July 11, 2008
relating to creation of  charge over securities for External Commercial Borrowings (ECB).
2.  Under the extant ECB guidelines, the choice of security to be provided to the  overseas lender / supplier for securing ECB is left to the borrower. With a  view to liberalising, expanding the options of securities and consolidating  various provisions related to creation of charge over securities for ECB at one  place, it has been decided that AD Category-I banks may allow creation of  charge on immovable assets, movable assets, financial securities and issue of  corporate and / or personal guarantees in favour of overseas lender / security  trustee, to secure the ECB to be raised / raised by the borrower, subject to  satisfying themselves that:
(i)  the underlying ECB is in compliance with the extant ECB guidelines, (ii) there  exists a security clause in the Loan Agreement requiring the ECB borrower to  create charge, in favour of overseas lender / security trustee, on immovable  assets / movable assets / financial securities / issuance of corporate and / or  personal guarantee, and (iii) No objection certificate, wherever necessary,  from the existing lenders in India has been obtained.
3.  Once aforesaid stipulations are met, the AD Category-I bank may permit creation  of charge on immovable assets, movable assets, financial securities and issue  of corporate and / or personal guarantees, during the currency of the ECB with  security co-terminating with underlying ECB, subject to the following:
(a)  Creation of Charge on immovable assets:
Such security shall be  subject to provisions contained in the Foreign Exchange Management (Acquisition  and Transfer of Immovable Property in India) Regulations, 2000.
The permission should not be  construed as a permission to acquire immovable asset (property) in India, by  the overseas lender / security trustee.
In the event of enforcement  / invocation of the charge, the immovable asset / property will have to be sold  only to a person resident in India and the sale proceeds shall be repatriated  to liquidate the outstanding ECB.
(b)  Creation of Charge on Movable Assets
In  the event of enforcement / invocation of the charge, the claim of the lender,  whether the lender takes over the movable asset or otherwise, will be  restricted to the outstanding claim against the ECB. Encumbered movable assets  may also be taken out of the country.
(c)  Creation of Charge over Financial Securities
Pledge of shares of the  borrowing company held by the promoters as well as in domestic associate  companies of the borrower will be permitted. Pledge on other financial  securities, viz. bonds and debentures, Government Securities, Government  Savings Certificates, deposit receipts of securities and units of the Unit  Trust of India or of any mutual funds, standing in the name of ECB  borrower/promoter, will also be permitted.
In addition, security  interest over all current and future loan assets and all current assets  including cash and cash equivalents, including Rupee accounts of the borrower  with AD Category-I banks in India, standing in the name of the  borrower/promoter, can be used as security for ECB. The Rupee accounts of the  borrower/promoter can also be in the form of escrow arrangement or debt service  reserve account.
In case of invocation of  pledge, transfer of financial securities shall be in accordance with the extant  FDI/FII policy including provisions relating to sectoral cap and pricing as  applicable read with the Foreign Exchange Management (Transfer or Issue of  Security by a Person Resident outside India) Regulations, 2000.
(d)  Issue of Corporate or Personal Guarantee
A copy of Board Resolution  for the issue of corporate guarantee for the company issuing such guarantee,  specifying name of the officials authorised to execute such guarantees on  behalf of the company or in individual capacity should be obtained.
Specific requests from  individuals to issue personal guarantee indicating details of the ECB should be  obtained.
Such security shall be  subject to provisions contained in the Foreign Exchange Management (Guarantees)  Regulations, 2000.
4.  These amendments to the ECB guidelines shall come into force with immediate  effect, subject to review from time to time. All other provisions related to  raising of ECB remain unchanged.
5.  AD Category – I banks may bring the contents of this Circular to the notice of  their constituents and customers.
6.  The directions contained in the Circular have been issued under sections 10(4)  and 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and are  without prejudice to permissions / approvals required, if any, under any other  law.
Yours faithfully
B P Kanungo
Principal Chief General Manager