(133 kb)
Monitoring of Large Value Frauds by the Board of Directors
RBI/2014-15/393
DCBR.BPD PCB Cir. No.10/12.05.001/2014-15
January 7, 2015
The Chief Executive Officer
All Primary (Urban) Co-operative  Banks
Madam / Dear Sir,
Monitoring of Large Value Frauds by the Board of  Directors
Please refer to our circular UBD.No.Plan.(PCB).9/09.06.00-94/95  dated July 25,1994 advising all UCBs to constitute an apex level Audit  Committee of Board (ACB). ACB may  consist of the Chairman and three/four directors, one or more such directors  being Chartered Accountants or having experience in management, finance,  accounting and audit systems etc. The ACB is required to oversee the internal  inspection, statutory audit, inter branch / inter-bank accounts, balancing of  books, major areas of house-keeping, etc. The Committee is also required to  focus attention on preventive aspects as well as follow up action on frauds.
2. As delay in various aspects of  frauds like detection, reporting to regulatory and enforcement agencies and  action against the perpetrators of the frauds has been causing concern, the  need is felt for paying focused  attention on monitoring of frauds at the highest level and suggested  constituting a subcommittee of the Board which would be exclusively dedicated  to the monitoring of fraud cases. There is also a need to assign a well defined  role to the Board of the banks in monitoring of fraud cases. It has, therefore,  been decided that the Boards of banks should constitute a Special Committee for  monitoring and following up cases of frauds involving amounts of Rs.1 crore and  above exclusively, while ACB may continue to monitor all the cases of frauds in  general.
3. The broad guidelines regarding  constitution and functions of the Special Committee of the Board are given in  the following paragraphs :
a) Constitution of the Special  Committee
The Special Committee may be  constituted with five members of the Board of Directors who will include,
* Chairman of Urban Cooperative Banks,
* Two members from ACB, and
* Two other members from the Board.
b) Functions of Special Committee
The major functions of the Special  Committee would be to monitor and review all the frauds of Rs.1 crore and above  so as to;
* Identify the systemic lacunae if  any that facilitated perpetration of the fraud and put in place measures to  plug the same;
* Identify the reasons for delay in  detection, if any, reporting to top management of the bank and RBI;
* Monitor progress of CBI / Police  Investigation, and recovery position and;
* Ensure that staff accountability is  examined at all levels in all the cases of frauds and staff side action, if  required, is completed quickly without loss of time.
* Review the efficacy of the remedial  action taken to prevent recurrence of frauds, such as strengthening of internal  controls.
* Put in place other measures as may  be considered relevant to strengthen preventive measures against frauds.
c) Meetings
The periodicity of the meetings of  the Special Committee may be decided according to the number of cases involved.  However, the Committee should meet and review as and when a fraud involving an  amount of Rs.1 crore and above comes to light.
d) Review of the functioning of  the Special Committee
The functioning of the Special  Committee of the Board may be reviewed on a half yearly basis and the reviews  where applicable may be put up to the Board of Directors.
The above instructions may please be  implemented with immediate effect. Action taken in this regard may be intimated  to us.
Yours faithfully,
(P  K Arora)
General Manager