(95 kb)
Foreign investment in India by Foreign Portfolio Investors
RBI/2014-15/448
A.P.(DIR Series) Circular No. 71
February  03, 2015
To,
All  Authorised Persons
Madam/  Sir,
Foreign investment in India by Foreign Portfolio  Investors
Attention  of Authorized Dealer Category-I (AD Category-I) banks is invited to Schedule 5  to the Foreign Exchange Management (Transfer or Issue of Security by a Person  Resident outside India) Regulations, 2000 notified vide
Notification  No. FEMA.20/2000- RB dated May 3, 2000
, as amended from time to time and to
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 13 dated July 23, 2014
in terms of which all  future investment in government securities by registered Foreign Portfolio  Investors (FPIs) shall be required to be made in government bonds with a  minimum residual maturity of three years.
2. Attention of AD Category-I banks is invited to the announcement in the
Sixth  Bi-Monthly Monetary Policy Statement, 2014-15, issued on February 03, 2015
in terms of which all future  investment by FPIs in the debt market in India will be  required to be made with a minimum residual maturity of three years.
3. Accordingly, all future investments by an FPI within the limit for investment in corporate  bonds shall be required to be made in corporate bonds with a minimum residual  maturity of three years. Further,  all future investments against the limits vacated when the current investment  runs off either through sale or redemption, shall be required to be made in  corporate bonds with a minimum residual maturity of three years.
4. FPIs shall not be allowed to  make any further investment in liquid and money market mutual fund schemes.
5. There will, however, be  no lock-in period and FPIs shall be free to sell the securities  (including those that are presently held with less than three years residual  maturity) to domestic investors.
6. The aforesaid directions come into  force with immediate effect. Further operational guidelines, if any, will be  issued by SEBI.
7. All other existing conditions for investment by FPIs in the debt market remain  unchanged.
8. AD Category – I banks may bring the contents of this circular to the  notice of their constituents and customers concerned.
9. The directions contained in this circular have been issued under sections  10(4) and 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and  are without prejudice to permissions / approvals, if any, required under any  other law.
Yours faithfully,
(B. P. Kanungo)
Principal Chief General Manager