(129 kb)
Guidelines for implementation of Countercyclical Capital Buffer (CCCB)
RBI/2014-15/452
DBR.No.BP.BC.71/21.06.201/2014-15
February  5, 2015
The  Chairman and Managing Director/
Chief  Executives Officer of
All  Scheduled Commercial Banks
(Excluding  Regional Rural Banks)
Madam/Dear  Sir,
Guidelines  for implementation of Countercyclical Capital Buffer (CCCB)
The  Internal Working Group of the Reserve Bank of India under the Chairmanship of  Shri B Mahapatra had submitted the final Report on the implementation of Countercyclical  Capital Buffer (CCCB) in July, 2014. The Report made recommendations in areas such  as indicators that may be used for CCCB decisions, thresholds for activating  the buffer, lead time for announcement of buffer, etc.
The  final guidelines for implementation of CCCB in India are
annexed
. While the  framework for CCCB takes immediate effect, the activation of CCCB will take  place when circumstances warrant. Currently, circumstances do not warrant  activation.
Yours  faithfully,
(Sudarshan  Sen)
Chief  General Manager-in-Charge
Annex
Guidelines for implementation of Countercyclical  Capital Buffer (CCCB)
1. The aim of the Countercyclical Capital Buffer (CCCB) regime  is twofold. Firstly, it requires banks to build up a buffer of capital in good  times which may be used to maintain flow of credit to the real sector in  difficult times. Secondly, it achieves the broader macro-prudential goal of restricting  the banking sector from indiscriminate lending in the periods of excess credit  growth that have often been associated with the building up of system-wide  risk.
2. The CCCB may be maintained in the form of Common  Equity Tier 1 (CET 1) capital or other fully loss absorbing capital only, and the amount  of the CCCB may vary from 0 to 2.5% of total risk weighted assets (RWA) of the  banks. If, as per the Reserve Bank of India directives, banks are  required to hold CCCB at a given point in time, the same may be disclosed at  table DF-11 of Annex 18 as indicated in Basel III Master Circular.
3. The CCCB decision would normally be pre-announced with  a lead time of 4 quarters. However, depending on the CCCB indicators, the banks  may be advised to build up requisite buffer in a shorter span of time.
4. The credit-to-GDP gap
1
shall be the main indicator in the CCCB framework in India. However, it shall not be the  only reference point and shall be used in conjunction with GNPA growth. The  Reserve Bank of India  shall also look at other supplementary indicators for CCCB decision such as incremental  C-D ratio for a moving period of three years (along with its correlation with  credit-to-GDP gap and GNPA growth), Industry Outlook (IO) assessment index  (along with its correlation with GNPA growth) and interest coverage ratio  (along with its correlation with credit-to-GDP gap). While taking the final  decision on CCCB, the Reserve Bank of India may use its discretion to use  all or some of the indicators along with the credit-to-GDP gap.
5. The CCCB framework shall  have two thresholds, viz., lower threshold and upper threshold, with respect to  credit-to-GDP gap.
The lower threshold (L) of the credit-to-GDP gap where  the CCCB is activated shall be set at 3 percentage points, provided its relationship with GNPA remains  significant. The buffer activation decision will also depend upon other supplementary  indicators as detailed in paragraph 4.
The upper  threshold (H) where the CCCB reaches its maximum shall be kept at 15 percentage  points of the credit-to-GDP gap. Once the upper threshold of the credit-to-GDP  gap is reached, the CCCB shall remain at its maximum value of 2.5 per cent of  RWA, till the time a withdrawal is signalled by the Reserve Bank of India.
In between 3 and 15  percentage points of credit-to-GDP gap, the CCCB shall increase gradually from  0 to 2.5 per cent of the RWA of the bank but the rate of increase would be  different based on the level/position
2
of credit-to-GDP gap between 3 and 15 percentage points. If the credit-to-GDP  gap is below 3 percentage points then there will not be any CCCB requirement.
6. The same set of indicators that are used for  activating CCCB (as mentioned in paragraph 4) may be used to arrive at the  decision for the release phase of the CCCB. However, discretion shall be with  the Reserve Bank of India  for operating the release phase of CCCB. Further, the entire CCCB accumulated may  be released at a single point in time but the use of the same by banks will not  be unfettered and will need to be decided only after discussion with the Reserve  Bank of India.
7. For all banks operating in India, CCCB shall be maintained on a  solo basis as well as on consolidated basis.
8. All banks operating in India  (both foreign and domestic banks) should maintain capital for Indian operations  under CCCB framework based on their exposures in India.
9. Banks incorporated in India  having international presence have to maintain adequate capital under CCCB as  prescribed by the host supervisors in respective jurisdictions. The banks,  based on the geographic location of their RWA, shall calculate their bank  specific CCCB requirement as a weighted
3
average of the requirements  that are being applied in respective jurisdictions. The Reserve Bank of India may also ask Indian banks to  keep excess capital under CCCB framework for exposures in any of the host  countries they are operating if it feels the CCCB requirement in host country  is not adequate.
10. Banks  will be subject to restrictions on discretionary distributions (may include  dividend payments, share buybacks and staff bonus payments) if they do not meet the requirement on  countercyclical capital buffer which is an extension of the requirement for  capital conservation buffer (CCB). Assuming a concurrent requirement of CCB of  2.5% and CCCB of 2.5% of total RWAs, the required conservation ratio  (restriction on discretionary distribution) of a bank, at various levels of  CET1 capital held is illustrated in
Table-1
.
Table 1: Individual bank minimum capital    conservation ratios, assuming a requirement of 2.5% each of capital    conservation buffer and CCCB
Common    Equity Tier 1 Ratio bands
Minimum    Capital Conservation Ratios
(expressed as a percentage    of earnings)
>5.5% - 6.75%
100%
>6.75% - 8.0%
80%
>8.0% - 9.25%
60%
>9.25% - 10.50%
40%
>10.50%
0%
The  CET 1 ratio bands are structured in increments of 25% of the required CCB and CCCB  prescribed by the Reserve Bank of India at that point in time
4
.  A separate illustrative table is given at
Appendix 1
with an assumption of CCCB  requirement at 1%.
11. Banks must ensure that their CCCB requirements are calculated and publicly  disclosed with at least the same frequency as their minimum capital  requirements as applicable in various jurisdictions. The buffer should be based  on the latest relevant jurisdictional CCCB requirements that are applicable on the date that they calculate their minimum capital requirement. In  addition, when disclosing their buffer requirement, banks must also disclose  the geographic breakdown of their RWAs used in the calculation of the buffer  requirement.
12. The CCCB decisions may form a part of the first bi-monthly monetary policy  statement of the Reserve Bank of India for the year. However, more  frequent communications in this regard may be made by the Reserve Bank of India, if warranted  by changes in economic conditions.
13. The indicators and thresholds for CCCB decisions mentioned  above shall be subject to continuous review and empirical testing for their  usefulness and other indicators may also be used by the Reserve Bank of India to  support CCCB decisions.
Appendix 1
Individual    bank minimum capital conservation standards, when a bank is subject to a 2.5%    CCB and 1% CCCB
Common    Equity Tier 1 Ratio bands
Minimum    Capital Conservation Ratios
(expressed as a percentage    of earnings)
> 5.5% - 6.375%*
100%
> 6.375% - 7.25%
80%
> 7.25% - 8.125%
60%
> 8.125% - 9.00%
40%
> 9.00%
0%
As the  total requirement of CCB and CCCB is 2.5% and 1% respectively, at each band, 0.625%  and 0.250% of RWA are being added for CCB and CCCB respectively.
*(6.375=5.50+0.625+0.250)
1
Credit-to-GDP gap is  the difference between credit-to-GDP ratio and the long term trend value of credit-to-GDP  ratio at any point in time.
2
The CCCB requirement  shall increase linearly from 0 to 20 basis points when credit-to-GDP gap moves  from 3 to 7 percentage points. Similarly, for above 7 and up to 11 percentage  points range of credit-to-GDP gap, CCCB requirement shall increase linearly  from above 20 to 90 basis points. Finally, for above 11 and up to 15 percentage  points range of credit-to-GDP gap, the CCCB requirement shall increase linearly  from above 90 to 250 basis points. However, if the credit-to-GDP gap exceeds 15  percentage points, the buffer shall remain at 2.5 per cent of the RWA.
3
Weight = (bank’s total RWA in a jurisdiction)/ (bank’s  total RWA across all jurisdictions).
4
First CET 1 ratio band = Minimum CET 1 ratio + 25% of CCB + 25% of  applicable CCCB. For subsequent bands, starting point will be the upper limit  of previous band. However, it may be mentioned that CET 1 ratio band may change  depending on various capital/buffer requirements (e.g. D-SIB buffer) as  prescribed by the Reserve Bank of India from time to time. Accordingly, lower  and upper values of the bands as given in Table-1 will undergo changes.