(19 kb)
Foreign investment in India by Foreign Portfolio Investors
RBI/2014-15/453
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.72
February 05, 2015
To,
All Authorised Persons
Madam/ Sir,
Foreign investment in  India by Foreign Portfolio Investors
Attention  of Authorized Dealer Category-I (AD Category-I) banks is invited to schedule 5  to the Foreign Exchange Management (Transfer or Issue of Security by a Person  Resident outside India) Regulations, 2000 notified vide
Notification No. FEMA.20/2000-RB dated May 3, 2000
, as amended from time to time, in terms of which  registered Foreign Portfolio Investors (FPIs) may purchase, on repatriation  basis Government securities and non-convertible debentures (NCDs) / bonds  issued by an Indian company subject to such terms and conditions as mentioned  therein and limits as prescribed for the same by the Reserve Bank of India and Securities and Exchange  Board of India from time to time.
2. Attention of AD  Category-I banks is also invited to the announcement in the
Sixth Bi-Monthly  Monetary Policy Statement, 2014-15, issued on February 03, 2015
in terms of  which reinvestment of coupons in Government securities will be enabled even  when the existing limits are fully utilised.
3. Accordingly, FPIs shall be permitted to invest in  government securities, the coupons received on their existing investments in  government securities. These investments shall be kept outside the applicable limit  (currently USD 30 billion) for investments by FPIs in government securities. AD  Category – I banks shall ensure reporting of such investments as may be  prescribed from time to time.
4. The aforesaid directions come into force with immediate effect. Further  operational guidelines will be issued by SEBI.
5. All other existing  conditions for investment by FPIs in the Government securities market remain  unchanged for this additional facility as well.
6. AD Category – I banks  may bring the contents of this circular to the notice of their constituents and  customers concerned.
7. The directions  contained in this circular have been issued under sections 10(4) and 11(1) of  the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and are without  prejudice to permissions / approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(B. P. Kanungo)
Principal Chief General  Manager