(91 kb)
Delay in Utilization of Advance Received for Exports
RBI/2014-15/461
A. P. (DIR Series)  Circular No.74
February 09, 2015
To
All Category-I Authorised  Dealer Banks
Madam / Sir,
Delay in Utilization  of Advance Received for Exports
Attention of Authorised Dealer Category – I (AD  Category – I) banks is invited to the sub-regulation (1) of Regulation 16  of the Foreign Exchange Management (Export of Goods and Services) Regulations,  2000, notified vide
Notification  No. FEMA 23 / RB-2000, dated May 3, 2000
, as amended from time to time read  with
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 105 dated May 20, 2013
,
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 108 dated June 11, 2013
and
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 37 dated November 20, 2014
in terms of which an  exporter receiving an advance payment for exports (with or without interest)  from a buyer outside India shall be under an obligation to ensure that the  shipment of goods is made within the stipulated period from the date of receipt  of advance payment.
2. As  it has been observed that there is substantial increase in the number and  amount of advances received for exports remaining outstanding beyond the  stipulated period on account of non-performance of such exports (shipments in  case of export of goods), AD Category –I banks are advised to efficiently  follow up with the concerned exporters in order to ensure that export  performance (shipments in case of export of goods) are completed within the  stipulated time period.
3. It  is further reiterated that AD category –I banks should exercise proper due  diligence and ensure compliance with KYC and AML guidelines so that only  bonafide export advances flow into India. Doubtful cases as also instances of  chronic defaulters may be referred to Directorate of Enforcement (DoE) for  further investigation. A quarterly statement indicating details of such cases  (as per
Annex
) may be forwarded to the concerned Regional Offices of RBI within  21 days from the end of each quarter.
4. AD Category – I banks  may bring the contents of this circular to the notice of their constituents and  customers concerned.
5. The directions contained  in this circular have been issued under Section 10 (4) and Section 11 (1) of  the Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA), 1999 (42 of 1999) and are without prejudice to permissions /  approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(C. D. Srinivasan)
Chief General Manager
Annex
Quarterly Statement showing details of overdue  Export Advances
(Statement for the quarter ended ……… , 20… )
Name and Address of the Bank:
S. No
AD Code
(Part-I code)
AD reference No.
Name & Address of the    Exporter
Name & Address    of the Foreign buyer
Details of Advance    Received
Amount outstanding    (in case of part exports)
Reasons for    non-export
If reference made    to DoE
Date
Currency
Amount
Date
Reasons