(219 kb)
Foreign Direct Investment – Reporting under FDI Scheme on the e-Biz platform
RBI//2014-15/468
A.P (DIR Series) Circular  No.77
February  12, 2015
To
All  Category – I Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam/Sir
Foreign  Direct Investment –
Reporting  under FDI Scheme on the e-Biz platform
Attention  of Authorised Dealers Category-I (AD Category - I) banks is invited to the  provisions of the Foreign Exchange Management (Transfer or Issue of Security by  a Person Resident outside India) Regulations 2000, notified by the Reserve  Bank vide
Notification  No. FEMA 20/2000-RB, dated 3rd May 2000
, as amended from time to time.  Attention of AD Category – I banks is also invited to
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No.102 dated February 11, 2014
and
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No.6 dated July 18, 2014
.
2.  With a view to promoting the ease of reporting of transactions under foreign  direct investment, the Reserve Bank of India, under the aegis of the e-Biz  project of the Government of India has enabled the filing of the following  returns with the Reserve Bank of India viz.
Advance Remittance Form  (ARF) - used by the companies to report the foreign direct investment (FDI)  inflow to RBI; and
FCGPR Form - which a company submits to RBI for  reporting the issue of eligible instruments to the overseas investor  against the above mentioned FDI inflow.
3.   The design of the reporting platform  enables the customer to login into the e-Biz portal, download the reporting  forms (ARF and FCGPR), complete and then upload the same onto the portal using  their digitally signed certificates. The Authorised Dealer Banks (ADs) will be  required to download the completed forms, verify the contents from the  available documents, if necessary by calling for additional information from  the customer and then upload the same for RBI to process and allot the Unique  Identification Number (UIN). It has been decided that the ARF and FCGPR  services of RBI will be operational on the e-Biz platform from
February 19,  2015
. The user manual for the two services is
Annexed
to this Circular.
4.   It may be noted that for the  present, the online reporting on the e-Biz platform is an additional facility  to the Indian companies to undertake their ARF and FCGPR reporting and the  manual system of reporting as prescribed in terms of A.P. (DIR Series) Circular  No. 102 dated February 11, 2014 would continue till further notice.
5.  The ADs will be required to access the e-Biz portal (which is hosted on the  National Informatics Centre (NIC) servers) using a Virtual Private Network  (VPN) Account obtained from NIC. The financial aspects for obtaining/using the  VPN accounts is being finalised in consultation with Government of India, DIPP  and NIC. The same will be informed in due course.
6.  AD Category-I banks may bring the contents of  this circular to the notice of their customers / constituents concerned. They  are advised to extend due  cooperation/assistance to their constituents for uploading the abovementioned  forms on the e-Biz platform.
7.  The directions contained in this circular have been issued under sections 10(4)  and 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA), 1999 (42 of 1999) and  are without prejudice to permissions / approvals, if any, required under any  other law.
Yours  faithfully,
(C  D Srinivasan)
Chief  General Manager