(95 kb)
Risk Management and Inter Bank Dealings: Foreign Currency (FCY) – INR Swaps
RBI/2014-15/469
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 78
February  13, 2015
To
All Category - I Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam  / Sir,
Risk Management and Inter Bank Dealings: Foreign  Currency (FCY) – INR Swaps
Attention  of Authorised Dealers Category‐I (AD Category‐I) banks is invited to the  Foreign Exchange Management (Foreign Exchange Derivative Contracts)  Regulations, 2000 dated May 3, 2000 (
Notification  No. FEMA/25/RB‐2000 dated May 3, 2000
) as amended from time to time and
A.P.  (DIR Series) circular no. 32 dated December 28, 2010
, as amended from time  to time.
2. In terms of paragraph (1) (iv) of section  B contained in the annex to the above circular, eligible residents can enter  into FCY-INR swaps to hedge exchange rate and/or interest rate risk  exposure arising out of long-term foreign currency borrowing or to transform  long-term INR borrowing into foreign currency liability, subject to operational  guidelines, terms and conditions listed thereunder. As per condition listed at (e), swap  transactions, once cancelled, shall not be rebooked or reentered, by whichever  mechanism or by whatever name called.
3. To  permit greater flexibility to the residents borrowing in foreign currency, it  has been decided that in cases where the underlying is still surviving, the client,  on cancellation of the swap contract, may be permitted to re-enter into a fresh  FCY-INR swap to hedge the underlying but only after the expiry of the tenor of  the original swap contract that had been cancelled. All other operational guidelines, terms and  conditions governing FCY-INR swaps remain unchanged.
4. AD Category-I banks may bring the contents of this circular to  the notice of their constituents and customers.
5. The directions contained in this circular have been issued  under Sections 10(4) and 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42  of 1999) and are without prejudice to permissions/ approvals, if any, required  under any other law.
Yours  faithfully
(Dimple  Bhandia)
General Manager