(122 kb)
Housing Loans: Review of Instructions
RBI/2014-15/491
DBR.BP.BC.No.74/08.12.015/2014-15
March 5, 2015
All  Scheduled Commercial Banks
(excluding RRBs)
Dear Sir,
Housing Loans: Review of Instructions
A. Inclusion of stamp duty  and other charges in LTV ratio
Please refer to our
circular  DBOD.No.BP.BC.78/08.12.001/2011-12 dated February 3, 2012
on ‘Housing Loans  by Commercial Banks - Loan to Value (LTV) Ratio’ whereby banks were advised  that they should not include stamp duty, registration and other documentation  charges in the cost of housing property so that the effectiveness of LTV ratio  is not diluted.
2.  It has been brought to our notice that these amounts form around 15% of the  cost of the house and place a burden on the borrowers from economically weaker  sections (EWS) and low income groups (LIG). With a view to encourage  availability of affordable housing to such borrowers, it has been decided that in  cases where the cost of the house/dwelling unit does not exceed Rs.10 lakh,  banks may add stamp duty, registration and other documentation charges to the cost  of the house/dwelling unit for the purpose of calculating LTV ratio.
B. Construction linked  disbursal of housing loan
3.  Please refer to our
circular  DBOD.BP.BC.No.51/08.12.015/2013-14 dated September 3, 2013
on “Housing  Sector: Innovative Housing Loan Products – Upfront disbursal of housing loans”,  in terms of which banks were advised that disbursal of housing loans sanctioned  to individuals should be closely linked to the stages of construction of the  housing project/houses and upfront disbursal should not be made in cases of  incomplete/under-construction/green field housing projects.
4.  In context of the above stipulation, some banks have represented that they are  not able to extend home loans to the allottees in the project developed by  Government Bodies/ Statutory Housing Authorities, as the payment schedule  prescribed by such authorities are not linked to the stages of construction. Such  authorities allot flats to the individual alottees with the following payment  modes:
One time lump-sum payment within 1 to  3 months after allotment.
Time linked payment plan not linked  to the stages of construction.
5.  On a review, banks are advised that in cases of projects sponsored by Government/Statutory  Authorities, they may disburse the loans as per the payment stages prescribed  by such authorities, even where payments sought from house buyers are not  linked to the stages of construction, provided such authorities have no past  history of non-completion of projects.
Yours  faithfully,
(Sudarshan Sen)
Chief General Manager-in-Charge