(227 kb)
Guidelines on Managing Risks and Code of Conduct in Outsourcing of Financial Services by Banks
RBI/2014-15/497
DBR.No.BP.BC.76/21.04.158/2014-15
March 11, 2015
All Scheduled Commercial Banks
(excluding  RRBs)
Dear Sir,
Guidelines on Managing Risks and Code of Conduct  in Outsourcing of Financial Services by Banks
Please refer to our
circular  DBOD.No.BP.40/21.04.158/2014-15 dated November 3, 2006
forwarding  the final guidelines on managing risks as applicable in outsourcing of  financial services.
2. In view of concerns raised that these instructions are not being  adhered to, we reiterate that outsourcing of any activity by the bank does not  diminish its obligations, and those of its Board and senior management, who  have the ultimate responsibility for the outsourced activity. Banks have been advised to take steps to  ensure that the service provider employs the same high standard of care in  performing the services as would be employed by the banks, if the activities  were conducted within the banks and not outsourced. Further, banks should not  engage in outsourcing that would result in their internal control, business  conduct or reputation being compromised or weakened.
3. Instances of non adherence  with the aforementioned guidelines have been observed with regard to  subcontracting by the primary outsourced vendors and the engagement of  subcontractors by the outsourced service providers without the prior consent of  the bank. It is clarified that the  Guidelines on Managing Risks and Code of Conduct in Outsourcing of Financial Services  by Banks apply
mutatis mutandis
to subcontracted activities, as well. Attention  is invited to paragraph 5.5.1 of the guidelines, wherein banks have
inter-alia
been advised that the outsourcing contract should provide for prior approval/  consent by the bank of the use of subcontractors by the service provider for  all or part of an outsourced activity.  Before giving their consent, banks should review the subcontracting  arrangements and ensure that these arrangements are compliant with the extant  guidelines on outsourcing.
4. Certain cases, like outsourcing of cash management, might involve  reconciliation of transactions between the bank, the service provider and its  sub-contractors. In such cases, banks  should ensure that reconciliation of transactions between the bank and the  service provider (and/ or its subcontractor), are carried out in a timely  manner. An ageing analysis of entries  pending reconciliation with outsourced vendors should be placed before the  Audit Committee of the Board (ACB) and banks should make efforts to reduce the  old outstanding items therein at the earliest.
5. A robust system of internal  audit of all outsourced activities should also be put in place and monitored by  the ACB of the bank.
Yours faithfully,
(Sudarshan Sen)
Chief General Manager - in- Charge