(390 kb)
Compliance function in banks
RBI/2014-15/489A
DBS.CO.PPD.10946/11.01.005/2014-15
March 04, 2015
To,
The Chairman / CEO
All Scheduled Commercial Banks
(excluding RRBs)
Dear Sir / Madam,
Compliance function in banks
Please refer to our
circular DBS.CO.PP.BC.6/11.01.005/2006-07 dated April  20, 2007
on compliance function in banks. It has been  observed that certain supervisory concerns continue to recur, necessitating the  need for tighter compliance regimes in banks in accordance with the above circular.  Further, with the advent of Risk Based Supervision approach, some additional aspects  are required to be overseen more incisively. Accordingly, while we re-iterate  the contemporary relevance of our circular issued in 2007, the additional  concerns and other aspects that would need review and testing from the  compliance perspective, are summarized in the
Annex
.
This circular has also been placed on RBI’s website  (
https://rbi.org.in
). In view of the increased focus on compliance review in  our supervisory processes, a comprehensive compliance plan replete with  compliance testing and review structures may be implemented in your bank.
Yours faithfully,
(Meena Hemachandra)
Principal Chief General Manager
Encl: As above.
Annex
Areas that require greater oversight in banks from  the perspective of compliance
1. Risk Based Supervision:
a. Certain very specific templates oriented towards  compliance assessment have been introduced under the RBS framework. RBI expects  Chief Compliance Officers to ensure total compliance with all specified  guidelines enlisted in the said template. It may also be noted that regulatory  guidelines forming part of such template are neither exhaustive nor static and  are expected to be updated on an annual basis. Banks may, therefore, strive to  put in an exhaustive compliance framework encompassing all guidelines emanating  from RBI, identify potential breaches and remedy them up-front.
b. Examination of compliance rigor prevalent in banks  will be suitably factored in the risk assessment process and would go further  in evaluating risk scores of banks. As banks may be aware, a similar regime  prevails under the CAMELS/CALCS approach as well.
2. Conflict of interest and independence of compliance  functions:
Supervisory reviews have, at several times, pointed  out significant and unwarranted forays of compliance functionaries on audit  committees/Boards and vice versa. In order to ensure that there is no room for  conflict of interest and the activities of the compliance function are subject  to independent review, the compliance function and the audit function of the  bank should necessarily be kept separate.
3. Reviews on compliance functions:
Board/ACB/Board level committees/ Internal Audits should regularly review compliance  functions in strict accordance with extant guidelines on the subject. Compliance  failures may be reviewed by Boards/Management Committees and appropriate  remedial measures may be taken.
4. Staffing of compliance Departments:
Staffing of compliance departments may be accorded  adequate priority in order to ensure that the compliance wings discharge their  functions without human resource constraints.
Appropriate succession planning may be resorted to,  for ensuring that the post of compliance officers does not remain vacant.
In certain cases, appointment of compliance  officers was not notified to RBI. Such instances may be avoided.
Compliance structure, set-up of compliance  Department, appointment of compliance officers etc may strictly be done in  accordance with Para 5 of the extant guidelines.
5. Compliance with Monitorable Action Plan/ Risk  Mitigation Plan:
RBI has been placing a lot of emphasis on banks’  adherence and compliance with MAP/RMP prescribed pursuant to the Annual  Financial Inspection/Risk Based Supervision process. Compliance units may  specifically devise a time-bound strategy to ensure that compliance on all  specified points is achieved within the time frame. RBI will continue to expect  an adept compliance scenario, where all MAP/RMP points are complied with well  before the commencement of the subsequent supervisory cycle and/or within the  periods prescribed for fulfilling the requirements of MAP/RMP. As banks may be  aware, penal provisions can also be invoked for unsatisfactory compliance with  MAP/RMP.
6. Compliance testing:
Compliance units in banks may evaluate the compliance  risk in each business line at periodical intervals and put up the results to  the Board/Management Committee.
7. Submission of Compliance:
It has been observed that few banks are submitting  compliance to AFI/RBS inspection reports through their Inspection & Audit  Department without bringing the same to the notice of the Chief Compliance  Officer. Hence, in case compliance to  RBI inspection reports is communicated through the Inspection & Audit  department of banks to RBI, a copy of the same needs to be endorsed to the  Chief Compliance Officer, for information.
8. Promoting a compliance culture:
It is important that the need to comply with instructions  meticulously is re-emphasized among all the staff in the bank through  continuous and mandatory training to all staff on compliance aspects,  appropriate disciplinary measures through staff accountability framework/  policies for non compliance etc. Compliance should not be seen as an activity  of the compliance department alone but as a culture that should pervade across  the banks.