(374 kb)
Guidelines for Relief Measures by Banks in Areas Affected by Natural Calamities
RBI/2014-15/512
FIDD.No.FSD.BC.52/05.10.001/2014-15
March 25, 2015
The Chairman/Managing  Director/Chief Executive Officer
All scheduled commercial banks
(excluding Regional Rural  Banks)
Madam  / Dear Sir,
GUIDELINES FOR RELIEF MEASURES BY  BANKS
IN AREAS AFFECTED BY NATURAL  CALAMITIES
Please  refer to our ‘
Master Circular RPCD.No.FSD.BC.07/05.04.02/2014-15  dated July 1, 2014
’ on the above subject. The guidelines contained in the above circular have  been revisited taking into account, inter alia, the provisions of National  Disaster Management Framework, National Crop Insurance Programme and different  practices being followed by State Governments in declaration of natural calamities.  The views of NABARD and Indian Banks’ Association have also been obtained.
2.  Based on the above inputs, the ‘Guidelines  for Relief Measures by Banks in areas affected by Natural Calamities’ have been  revised and are
enclosed
for implementation by banks.
3. Please acknowledge receipt.
Yours  faithfully,
(Madhavi Sharma)
Chief General Manager
GUIDELINES FOR RELIEF MEASURES  BY BANKS IN AREAS
AFFECTED BY  NATURAL CALAMITIES
Periodical but frequent occurrences of natural  calamities take a heavy toll of human life and cause wide spread damage to  economic pursuits of human beings in one area or the other of our country. The  devastation caused by such natural calamities calls for massive rehabilitation  efforts by all agencies. The Central, State and local authorities draw  programmes for economic rehabilitation of the affected people. The  developmental role assigned to the commercial banks and co-operative banks,  warrants their active support in revival of the economic activities.
2. In terms of National Disaster Management Framework, there  are two funds constituted viz. National Disaster Response Fund and State  Disaster Response Fund for providing relief in the affected areas. This  framework currently recognizes 12 types of natural calamities viz. cyclone,  drought, earthquake, fire, flood, tsunami, hailstorm, landslide, avalanche,  cloud burst, pest attack and cold wave/frost (added in August 2012).  Of these 12 calamities, for 4 calamities  i.e. drought, hailstorms, pest attack and cold wave/frost, the Ministry of  Agriculture is the nodal ministry while for remaining 8 calamities Ministry of  Home Affairs is required to make appropriate arrangements. A slew of measures  for relief are undertaken by the Sovereign (Central/State Government) to  provide relief to the affected persons which include, inter alia, provision for  the input subsidies and financial assistance to marginal, small and other  farmers.
3.  The banks’ contribution in providing relief relates to  rescheduling of existing loans and sanctioning of fresh loans as per the  emerging requirements of the borrowers. Banks need to have some Institutional  framework in place to deal with the situation and they may also like to take  some other facilitating measures like reducing/waiving their penal charges,  etc. The precise details in regard to  the provision of credit assistance by the commercial banks will depend on the  requirements of the situation, their own operational capabilities and the  actual needs of the borrowers.
4. Nevertheless, to enable banks to take uniform  and concerted action expeditiously, these guidelines are issued covering the  above-mentioned four aspects viz. Institutional Framework (Para 5),  Restructuring of Existing Loans (Para 6), Providing Fresh Loans (Para 7) and Other Ancillary Relief Measures (Para 8).
5.
INSTITUTIONAL  FRAMEWORK
Establishing Policy/Procedures for dealing with  Natural Calamities
5.1 Since the area and time of occurrence and  intensity of natural calamities cannot be anticipated, it is imperative that  the banks have a blueprint of action in such eventualities duly approved by the  Board of Directors so that the required relief and assistance is provided with  utmost speed and without any loss of time. This pre-supposes that all the branches  of commercial banks and their Regional and Zonal Offices will have a set of  standing instructions spelling out the action that the branches will have to  initiate in the calamity affected areas immediately after the requisite  declaration by the district/ state authorities. It is necessary that these  instructions should also be available with the State Government authorities and  all the District Collectors so that all concerned are clear about the action  that would be taken by the banks’ branches in the affected areas.
Discretionary Powers to Divisional / Zonal Manager  of banks
5.2  Divisional/ Zonal Managers of commercial banks should be vested with  certain discretionary powers so that they do not have to seek fresh approvals  from their Central Offices to the line of action agreed to by the District/  State Level Bankers’ Committees. For example, such discretionary powers would  be necessary in regard to adoption of scales of finance, extension of loan  periods, sanction of new loans keeping in view the total liability of the  borrower (i.e. arising out of the old loan where the assets financed are  damaged or lost on account of natural calamity as well as the new loan for  creation/repair of such assets), margin, security, etc.
Meetings of State Level Bankers’ Committee/District  Consultative Committee
5.3 In the event of the calamity covering entire  State/ larger part of a State, the convener of the State Level Bankers’  Committee will convene a meeting immediately after the occurrence of natural  calamity to evolve a coordinated action plan for implementation of the relief  programme in collaboration with the State Government authorities. However, in  case the calamity has affected only a small part of the State/few districts,  the conveners of the District Consultative Committees of the affected districts  should convene a meeting immediately. In  these special SLBC/DCC meetings, the position in the affected areas should be  assessed to ensure speedy formulation and implementation of suitable relief  measures by banks.
5.4 Wherever the calamity is very severe, the  relief measures initiated and undertaken may be reviewed periodically in the  weekly/fortnightly meetings of specially constituted Task Forces or sub  Committees of the SLBC till such time as conditions are normalized.
Declaration of Natural Calamity
5.5 It is recognised that declaration of natural  calamities is in the domain of the Sovereign (Central/State Governments). The  inputs received from the State Governments reveal that there are no uniform  procedures being followed for declaration of natural calamity and issue of  declarations/certificates. These declarations/certificates are called by  different names such as Annewari, Paisewari, Girdawari, etc. in different  States. Nevertheless, the common thread to extend relief measures is that
the crop loss assessed should be 50% or  more
. For assessing this loss, while some States are conducting crop  cutting experiments to determine the loss in crop yield, some others are  relying on the eye estimates/visual impressions.
Distinction between Drought and Other Calamities
5.6 So far  as Drought is concerned, a couple of States are following the advanced  methodology based on the data of rainfall, crop area sown, vegetation index,  moisture adequacy index along with other parameters as suggested in the ‘Manual for Drought Management’ released by  the Ministry of Agriculture. In the  circumstances, it is considered appropriate to make distinction between (i) Drought (which is generally a slowly evolving  calamity and can aggravate or reverse as per the rainfall during the period;  and (ii) Other Calamities which are physiologically different from Drought and  are of a sudden nature;
Drought :
As the ‘Manual for Drought Management’  commends certain guidelines for the State Governments (while making it clear  that these guidelines are not mandatory) on the adoption of scientific  technology and various parameters/indexes, as mentioned above, to assess the situation, the State Governments  may either:
adopt the procedures  indicated in the Manual for Drought Management and based on the various  parameters/indexes indicated therein, decide on the declaration of drought.  Such declarations should elaborately indicate the data/procedures which have  been relied upon/followed by the State government and the extent of assessed  crop loss.
conduct Crop Cutting Experiments as prescribed in the  National Agriculture Insurance Programme, which is one of the pre-conditions  for declaring the crops eligible for insurance, and declare the ‘Annewari’ (by whatever name called)  indicating the crop-wise percentage loss in  the certificates issued. In any case, State Governments need to submit  detailed taluka/block/district wise crop loss data to Central Government if  they seek any funds for relief work.
Other Calamities :
The loss should be assessed through crop cutting  experiments clearly indicating that the crop loss in the particular  area/taluka/mandal/block (as the case may be) has been 50% or more to trigger  reschedulement of loans from banks. In  case of extreme situations such as wide-spread floods, etc. when it is largely  clear that most of the standing crops have been damaged and/or land and other  assets have suffered a wide-spread damage, the matter be deliberated by State  Government/District Authorities in the especially convened SLBC/DCC meetings where  the concerned Government functionary/District Collector may explain the reasons  for not estimating ‘Annewari’ (percentage of crop loss – by whatever name  called) through crop cutting experiments and that the decision to provide  relief for the affected populace needs to be taken based on the eye  estimate/visual impressions.
In both the cases,  however, DCCs/SLBC have to satisfy themselves fully that the crop loss has been  50% or more before acting on these pronouncements.
6.
Restructuring/Rescheduling of Existing  Loans
6.1 As the repaying capacity of the people affected  by natural calamities gets severely impaired due to the damage to the economic  pursuits and loss of economic assets, relief in repayment of loans becomes  necessary in areas affected by natural calamity and hence, restructuring of the  existing loans will be required.
Agriculture Loans
Short-term Production Credit (Crop Loans)
6.2  All short-term loans, except those which are  overdue at the time of occurrence of natural calamity, should be eligible for  restructuring.  The principal amount of  the short-term loan as well as interest due for repayment in the year of  occurrence of natural calamity may be converted into term loan.
6.3  The  repayment period of restructured loans may vary depending on the severity of  calamity and its recurrence, the extent of loss of economic assets and distress  caused. Generally, the restructured period for repayment may be 3 to 5 years.  However, where the damage arising out of the calamity is very severe, banks  may, at their discretion, extend the period of repayment ranging up to 7 years  and in extreme cases of hardship, the repayment period may be prolonged up to a  maximum period of 10 years in consultation with the Task Force/ SLBC.
6.4 In all  cases of restructuring, moratorium period of at least one year should be  considered. Further, the banks should not insist for additional collateral  security for such restructured loans.
Agriculture Loans - Long term (Investment) Credit
6.5 The existing term loan installments will have  to be rescheduled keeping in view the repaying capacity of the borrowers and  the nature of natural calamity viz.,
a) Natural  Calamities where only crop for that year is damaged and productive assets are  not damaged.
b) Natural Calamities where the productive assets  are partially or totally damaged and borrowers are in need of a new loan.
6.6 In regard to natural calamity under category  (a) above, the banks may reschdeule the payment of installment during the year  of natural calamity and extend the loan period by one year. Under this  arrangement the installments defaulted wilfully in earlier years will not be  eligible for rescheduling. The banks may also have to postpone payment of  interest by borrowers.
6.7  In  regard to category (b) i.e. where the borrower’s assets are partially/totally  damaged, the rescheduling by way of extension of loan period may be determined  on the basis of overall repaying capacity of the borrower vis-a-vis his total  liability (old term loan, restructured crop loan, if any and the fresh  crop/term loan being given) less the subsidies received from the Government  agencies, compensation available under the insurance schemes, etc. While the total repayment period for the  restructured/fresh term loan will differ on case-to-case basis, generally it  should not exceed a period of 10 years.
Other Loans
6.8 A  view needs to be taken by SLBC/DCC depending on the severity of the calamity as  to whether a general reschedulement of all other loans (i.e. besides the  agriculture loans as indicated above) such as loans granted for allied  activities and loans given to rural artisans, traders, micro/small industrial  units or in case of extreme situations, medium enterprises is required. If such a decision is taken, while recovery  of all the loans be postponed by the specified period, banks will have to  assess the requirement of the individual borrowers in each such case and depending  on the nature of his account, repayment capacity and the need for the fresh  loans, appropriate decisions may be taken by the individual banks.
6.9 The  primary consideration before the banks in extending credit to any unit for its  rehabilitation should be the viability of the venture after the rehabilitation  programme is implemented.
Asset Classification
6.10 The  asset classification status of these loans will be as under:
a) The restructured portion of the short term as  well as long-term loans may be treated as current dues and need not be  classified as NPA. The asset classification of these fresh term loans would  thereafter be governed by the revised terms and conditions. Nevertheless, banks  are required to make higher provisions for such restructured standard advances  as prescribed by Department of Banking Regulation from time to time.
b) The asset classification of the remaining amount  due, which have not been restructured, will continue to be governed by the  original terms and conditions. Consequently, the dues from the borrower may be  classified by the lending bank under different asset classification categories  viz. standard, sub-standard, doubtful and loss.
c) Additional finance, if any, may be treated as  “standard asset” and its future asset classification will be governed by the  terms and conditions of its sanction.
6.11 With  the objective to ensure that banks are sufficiently proactive in extending the  relief to the affected persons, the benefit of asset classification of the  restructured accounts as on the date of natural calamity will be available only  if the restructuring is completed within a period of three months from the date  of natural calamity. In the event of  extreme calamity, when the SLBC/DCC is of the view that this period will not be  sufficient for the banking sector to reschedule all the loans, they should  immediately approach RBI (concerned Regional Office) giving the reasons for  seeking extension. These requests will be considered on the basis of merit of  each case.
6.12 The accounts that are restructured for the  second time or more on account of natural calamities would retain the same  asset classification category on restructuring. Accordingly, for once  restructured standard asset, the subsequent restructuring necessitated on  account of natural calamity would not be treated as second restructuring, i.e.,  the standard asset classification will be allowed to be maintained. All other  restructuring norms, however, will apply.
Utilisation of Insurance Proceeds
6.13  While  the above measures relating to rescheduling of loans are intended to provide  relief to the farmers, the insurance proceeds should, ideally, compensate their  losses. In terms of orders issued by  Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperation, National Crop Insurance Programme  (NCIP) has been implemented across the Country from Rabi 2013. The loanee farmers are compulsorily covered  under the NCIP-component Scheme as notified by the State Governments.  While restructuring the loans in the areas  affected by natural calamities, banks should also take into account the  insurance proceeds, if any, receivable from the Insurance Company. They should adjust these proceeds to  ‘restructured accounts’. However,
it should be done in cases where they have  granted fresh loans to the borrowers
.
7.
Sanctioning  of Fresh Loans
7.1 Once the decisions on the rescheduling of loans  is taken by SLBC/DCC, pending such conversion of short-term loans, banks may  grant fresh crop loans to the affected farmers which will be based on the scale  of finance for the particular crop and the cultivation area, as per the extant  guidelines.
7.2 The bank  assistance in relation to agriculture and allied activities (poultry, fishery,  animal husbandry, etc.) would also be needed for long term loans for a variety  of purposes such as repair of existing economic assets or acquisition of new  assets. Similarly, rural artisans, self-employed persons, micro and small  industrial units, etc. in the areas affected by natural calamities may require  the credit to sustain their livelihood. Banks may, of their own, assess and  decide on the quantum of fresh loans to be granted to the affected borrowers  taking into consideration, amongst others, their credit requirements and the  due procedure followed for sanctioning of loans.
7.3  Banks  may also grant consumption loans up to Rs. 10,000/- to existing borrowers  without any collateral. The limit may, however, be enhanced beyond Rs. 10,000/-  at the discretion of the bank.
Terms and Conditions
Guarantee, Security and Margin
7.4 Credit  should not be denied for want of personal guarantees. Where the bank’s existing  security has been eroded because of damage or destruction by floods, assistance  will not be denied merely for want of additional fresh security. The fresh loan  may be granted even if the value of security (existing as well as the asset to  be acquired from the new loan) is less than the loan amount. For fresh loans, a  sympathetic view will have to be taken.
7.5 Where the crop loan (which has been converted  into term loan) was earlier given against personal security/ hypothecation of  crop and the borrower is not able to offer charge/mortgage of land as security  for the converted loan, he should not be denied conversion facility merely on  the ground of his inability to furnish land as security. If the borrower has  already taken a term loan against mortgage/charge on land, the bank should be  content with a second charge for the converted term loan. Banks should not  insist on third party guarantees for providing conversion facilities.
7.6 Where land is taken as security, in the absence  of original title records, a certificate issued by the Revenue Department  officials may be accepted for financing farmers who have lost proof of their  titles i.e. in the form of deeds, as also the registration certificates issued  to registered share-croppers.
7.7 Margin requirements may be waived or the  grants/ subsidy given by the concerned State Government may be considered as  margin.
Rate of Interest
7.8 The rates of interest will be in accordance  with the directives of the Reserve Bank. Within the areas of their discretion,  however, banks are expected to take a sympathetic view of the difficulties of  the borrowers and extend a concessional treatment to calamity-affected people.  In respect of current dues in default, no penal interest will be charged. The  banks should also suitably defer the compounding of interest charges. Banks may  not levy any penal interest and consider waiving penal interest, if any,  already charged in regard to the loans converted/rescheduled. Depending on the  nature and severity of natural calamity, the  SLBC/ DCC shall take a view on the interest rate concession that could be  extended to borrowers so that there is uniformity in approach among banks in  providing relief.
8.
Other Ancillary Relief Measures
Besides rescheduling of existing loans and  providing fresh loans to the affected persons, banks may also follow the  following guidelines
Know Your Customer Norms - Relaxations
8.1 It needs to be recognized that many persons  displaced or adversely affected by a major calamity may not have access to  their normal identification and personal records. In such cases, where the affected persons are  not able to provide standard identification documents, as permitted under the  regulation and as a consequence, it is not possible for bank branches to follow  the KYC guidelines as prescribed, they may resort to non-documentary  verification methods. They can open a small account based on the photograph and  signature or thumb impression in front of the bank official. The above instructions will be applicable to  cases where the balance in the account does not exceed Rs. 50,000/- or the  amount of relief granted (if higher ) and the total credit in the account does  not exceed Rs. 1,00,000/- or the amount of relief granted, (if higher) in a  year.
Providing access to Bank Accounts
8.2 In areas where the bank branches are affected  by natural calamity and are unable to function normally, banks may operate from  temporary premises, under advice to RBI. For continuing the temporary premises  beyond 30 days, specific approval may be obtained from the concerned regional  office(RO) of RBI. Banks may also ensure rendering of banking services to the  affected areas by setting up satellite offices, extension counters or mobile  banking facilities under intimation to RBI.
8.3 To satisfy customer’s immediate cash  requirements, restoration of the functioning of ATMs at the earliest or making  alternate arrangements for providing such facilities may be given due  importance. Banks may consider putting in place arrangements for allowing their  customers to access other ATM networks, Mobile ATMs, etc.
8.4 Other measures that banks may take, at their  discretion, to alleviate the condition of affected persons could be waiving ATM  fees, increasing ATM withdrawal limits; waiving overdraft fees; waiving early  withdrawal penalties on time deposits; waiving late fee for credit card/other  loan installment payments and giving option to credit card holders to convert  their outstanding balance to EMIs repayable in 1 or 2 years. Besides, all  charges debited to the farm loan account other than the normal interest may be  waived considering the hardship caused to farmers.
9.
Applicability  of the guidelines in the case of riots and disturbances
9.1 Whenever RBI advises the banks to extend  rehabilitation assistance to the riot/ disturbance affected persons, the  aforesaid guidelines may broadly be followed by banks for the purpose. It  should, however, be ensured that only genuine persons, duly identified by the  State Administration as having been affected by the riots/ disturbances, are  provided assistance as per the guidelines.
9.2 The issuance of advice to the banks by Reserve  Bank of India on receipt of request/ information from State Government and  thereafter issue of instructions by banks to their branches generally results  in delay in extending the assistance to riot-affected people. With a view to  ensuring quick relief to the affected persons, it has been decided that the  District Collector, on occurrence of the riots/ disturbances, may ask the Lead  Bank Officer to convene a meeting of the DCC, if necessary and submit a report  to the DCC on the extent of damage caused to life and property in the area  affected by riots/disturbances. If the DCC is satisfied that there has been  extensive loss to life and property on account of the riots/ disturbances, the  relief as per the above guidelines may be extended to the people affected by  the riots/ disturbances. In certain cases, where there are no District  Consultative Committees, the District Collector may request the convener of the  State Level Bankers’ Committee of the State to convene a meeting of the bankers  to consider extension of relief to the affected persons. The report submitted  by the Collector and the decision thereon of DCC/ SLBC may be recorded and  should form a part of the minutes of the meeting. A copy of the proceedings of  the meeting may be forwarded to the concerned Regional Office of the Reserve  Bank of India.