(267 kb)
Prudential Norms on Income Recognition, Asset Classification and Provisioning pertaining to Advances – Projects Under Implementation – Change in Ownership
RBI/2014-15/538
DBR.No.BP.BC.84/21.04.048/2014-15
April 6, 2015
All  Scheduled Commercial Banks
(Excluding  Regional Rural Banks)
Dear Sir,
Prudential  Norms on Income Recognition, Asset Classification and Provisioning pertaining  to Advances – Projects Under Implementation – Change in Ownership
We have been receiving representations  from banks that, in the case of projects which have been stalled primarily due  to inadequacies of the current promoters, a change in ownership/management may  be required to revive the project. However, the new promoters/developers may  require additional time to revive/complete the stalled projects.
2. Accordingly, in paragraph 26 (
extract  enclosed
) of the Sixth Bi-Monthly Monetary Policy Statement, 2014-15 announced  on February 03, 2015, it was proposed to allow extension of the date of  commencement of commercial operations (DCCO) without change in asset  classification in cases of change in ownership of the projects.
3. It has been decided that in cases where,  in the assessment of the banks, the implementation of the project has been  stalled primarily due to inadequacies of the existing promoters and a  subsequent change in the ownership of the borrowing entity has been effected,  banks may permit extension of DCCO up to a further period of two years, in  addition to the extension of DCCO permitted under existing regulations. Detailed guidelines in this regard are
annexed
.
Yours faithfully,
(Sudarshan Sen)
Chief  General Manager-in-Charge
Extracts from Sixth  Bi-Monthly Monetary Policy Statement, 2014-15
26. At present,  implementation of large projects is complex and unforeseen events may cause  delays in project implementation, leading to failure in achieving the  originally envisaged date of commencement of commercial operations (DCCO). The  Reserve Bank has allowed vide circulars dated March 31, 2010 and May 30, 2013,  certain flexibility with regard to loans to projects under implementation,  wherein DCCO of the projects under implementation along with repayment  schedules for such loans are allowed to be shifted to a certain extent without  adversely affecting the asset classification of such loans. However, in the  case of projects which have been stalled primarily due to inadequacies of the  current promoters/management, a change in ownership and management may be  required to revive the project. In this context, the new promoters/developers  may require additional time to revive/complete the stalled projects. In order  to facilitate change in ownership and revival, it has been decided to provide  further flexibility by allowing a further extension of the DCCO of such  projects where a change of ownership takes place, without adversely affecting  the asset classification of loans to such projects, subject to certain  conditions. Operating guidelines in this regard will be issued shortly.
Annex
1. In terms of extant instructions  contained in the
circulars DBOD.No.BP.BC.85/  21.04.048/2009-10 dated March 31, 2010
and
DBOD.BP.BC. No.99/21.04.132/2012-13  dated May 30, 2013
, revisions of the date  of DCCO and consequential  shift in repayment schedule for equal or shorter duration (including the start  date and end date of revised repayment schedule)
will not be treated as restructuring
provided that:
The revised DCCO falls within the period of two years and one year from  the original DCCO stipulated at the time of financial closure for  infrastructure projects and non-infrastructure projects respectively; and
All  other terms and conditions of the loan remain unchanged.
2. Further, in terms of extant  instructions quoted at paragraph 1 above, banks may restructure such loans,  subject to the extant prudential norms on restructuring of advances, by way of  revision of DCCO beyond the time limits quoted at paragraph 1(a) above and retain  the ‘standard’ asset classification, if the fresh DCCO is fixed within the following limits, and the account  continues to be serviced as per the restructured terms:
Infrastructure  Projects involving court cases
Up to another two years (beyond the two year period  quoted at paragraph 1(a) above, i.e., total extension of four years), in case  the reason for extension of DCCO is arbitration proceedings or a court case.
Infrastructure  Projects delayed for other reasons beyond the control of promoters
Up to another one year  (beyond the two year period quoted at paragraph 1(a) above, i.e., total  extension of three years), in case the reason for extension of DCCO is beyond  the control of promoters (other than court cases).
Project Loans for Non-Infrastructure Sector
(Other than  Commercial Real Estate Exposures)
Up to another  one year (beyond  the one year period quoted at paragraph 1(a) above, i.e., total extension of  two years).
3. In order to facilitate revival of the  projects stalled primarily due to inadequacies of the current promoters, it is  advised that if a change in ownership takes place any time during the periods quoted  in paragraphs 1 and 2 above or before the original DCCO, banks may permit extension  of the DCCO of the project up to two years in addition to the periods quoted at  paragraph 1 and 2 above, as the case may be, without any change in asset  classification of the account subject to the conditions stipulated in the  following paragraphs. Banks may also consequentially shift/extend repayment  schedule, if required, by an equal or shorter duration.
4. It is clarified that in cases where  change in ownership and extension of DCCO (as indicated in paragraph 3 above)  takes place before the original DCCO, and if the project fails to commence  commercial operations by the extended DCCO, the project will be eligible for  further extension of DCCO in terms of guidelines quoted at paragraph 1 and 2  above. Similarly, where change in  ownership and extension of DCCO takes place during the period quoted in  paragraph 1 (a) above, the account may  still be restructured by extension of DCCO in terms of guidelines quoted at  paragraph 2 above, without classifying the account as non-performing asset.
5. The  provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4 above are subject to the following conditions:
i) Banks should establish that  implementation of the project is stalled/affected primarily due to inadequacies  of the current promoters/management and with a change in ownership there is a  very high probability of commencement of commercial operations by the project  within the extended period;
ii) The project in consideration should be  taken-over/acquired by a new promoter/promoter group with sufficient expertise  in the field of operation. If the acquisition is being carried out by a special  purpose vehicle (domestic or overseas), the bank should be able to clearly  demonstrate that the acquiring entity is part of a new promoter group with  sufficient expertise in the field of operation;
iii) The new promoters should own at least  51 per cent of the paid up equity capital of stake in the acquired project. If  the new promoter is a non-resident, and in sectors where the ceiling on foreign  investment is less than 51 per cent, the new promoter should own atleast 26 per  cent of the paid up equity capital or up to applicable foreign investment  limit, whichever is higher, provided banks are satisfied that with this equity  stake the new non-resident promoter controls the management of the project;
iv) Viability of the project should be established  to the satisfaction of the banks.
v) Intra-group business  restructuring/mergers/acquisitions and/or takeover/acquisition of the project  by other entities/subsidiaries/associates etc. (domestic as well as overseas),  belonging to the existing promoter/promoter group will not qualify for this  facility. The banks should clearly establish that the acquirer does not belong  to the existing promoter group;
vi) Asset classification of the account as  on the ‘reference date’ would continue during the extended period. For this  purpose, the ‘reference date’ would be  the date of execution of  preliminary binding agreement between the parties to the transaction, provided  that the acquisition/takeover of ownership as per the provisions of  law/regulations governing such acquisition/takeover is completed within a  period of 90 days from the date of execution of preliminary binding agreement. During  the intervening period, the usual asset classification norms would continue to  apply. If the change in ownership is not completed within 90 days from the preliminary  binding agreement, the ‘reference date’ would be the effective date of acquisition/takeover  as per the provisions of law/regulations governing such acquisition/takeover;
vii) The new owners/promoters are expected  to demonstrate their commitment by bringing in substantial portion of  additional monies required to complete the project within the extended time  period. As such, treatment of financing of cost overruns for the project shall continue  to be subject to the guidelines prescribed in
circular DBOD.No.BP.BC.33/21.04.048/2014-15  dated August 14, 2014
. Financing of cost overrun beyond the ceiling prescribed  in the circular dated August 14, 2014 would be treated as an event of  restructuring even if the extension of DCCO is within the limits prescribed  above;
viii) While considering the extension of DCCO  (up to an additional period of 2 years) for the benefits envisaged hereinabove,  banks shall make sure that the repayment schedule does not extend beyond 85 per  cent of the economic life/concession period of the project; and
ix) This facility would be available to a  project only once and will not be available during subsequent change in  ownership, if any.
6. Loans covered under this guideline would  attract provisioning as per the extant provisioning norms depending upon their  asset classification status.