(213 kb)
Foreign Exchange Management (Transfer or Issue of Security by a Person Resident outside India) (Tenth Amendment) Regulations, 2015
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
FOREIGN EXCHANGE DEPARTMENT
CENTRAL OFFICE
MUMBAI-400 001
Notification No. FEMA.354/2015-RB
October 30, 2015
Foreign Exchange Management (Transfer or Issue of Security by a Person
Resident outside India) (Tenth Amendment) Regulations, 2015
In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (b) of sub-section (3) of Section 6 and Section 47 of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999), the Reserve Bank of India hereby makes the following amendments in the Foreign Exchange Management (Transfer or issue of Security by a Person Resident outside India) Regulations, 2000 (
Notification No. FEMA. 20/2000-RB dated 3rd May 2000
) namely:-
1. Short Title & Commencement
(i) These Regulations may be called the Foreign Exchange Management (Transfer or Issue of Security by a Person Resident outside India) (Tenth Amendment) Regulations, 2015.
(ii) They shall come into force from the date of their publication in the Official Gazette
2. Amendment of the Regulation
In the Foreign Exchange Management (Transfer or Issue of Security by a Person Resident outside India) Regulations, 2000, (Notification No.FEMA 20/2000-RB dated 3rd May 2000), (A) in Regulation 14,
(i) in sub-regulation 1, in the existing clause ‘(x)’ the following shall be inserted, namely:
“Explanation:
(i) Total Foreign Investment shall include all types of foreign investments, direct and indirect, regardless of whether the said investments have been made under Schedule 1, Schedule 2, Schedule 2A, Schedule 3, Schedule 6, Schedule 8, Schedule 9 and Schedule 10 of Foreign Exchange Management (Transfer or Issue of Security by a Person Resident outside India) Regulations, 2000.
(ii) Foreign Currency Convertible Bonds (FCCB) and Depository Receipts (DR) having underlying of instruments which can be issued under Schedule 5, being in the nature of debt, shall not be treated as foreign investment. However, any equity holding by a person resident outside India resulting from any conversion of any debt instrument under any arrangement shall be reckoned as foreign investment.”
(ii) in sub-regulation 3, the existing clause (ii) shall be substituted by the following, namely:
“Counting of indirect foreign investment:
For the purpose of computation of indirect foreign investment, foreign investment in an Indian company shall include all types of foreign investments regardless of whether the said investments have been made under Schedules 1, 2 (FII holding as on March 31), 2A (FPI holding as on March 31), 3, 6, 8, 9 and 10 of FEMA (Transfer or Issue of Security by Persons Resident Outside India) Regulations, 2000. FCCBs and DRs having underlying of instruments which can be issued under Schedule 5, being in the nature of debt, shall not be treated as foreign investment. However, any equity holding by a person resident outside India resulting from conversion of any debt instrument under any arrangement shall be reckoned as foreign investment.”
B. Amendment of Schedule 1
(i) In Schedule 1, in paragraph 2 (1), after the words “from time to time’ the following proviso shall be inserted
“Provided that
In the sectors/activities mentioned in the Annex B to the Schedule, foreign investment upto the limit indicated against each sector/activity is allowed subject to the conditions of the extant policy on specified sectors and applicable laws/regulations; security and other conditionalities. In sectors/activities not listed therein, foreign investment is permitted upto 100% on the automatic route, subject to applicable laws/regulations; security and other conditionalities.
Wherever there is a requirement of minimum capitalization it shall include share premium received along with the face value of the share, only when it is received by the company upon issue of the shares to the non-resident investor. Amount paid by the transferee during post-issue transfer of shares beyond the issue price of the share, cannot be taken into account while calculating minimum capitalization requirement.
“Sectoral cap” i.e. the maximum amount which can be invested by foreign investors in an entity, unless provided otherwise, is composite and includes all types of foreign investments, direct and indirect, regardless of whether the said investments have been made under Schedule 1, 2, 2(A), 3, 6, 8, 9 and 10 of FEMA (Transfer or Issue of Security by Persons Resident Outside India) Regulations, 2000. FCCBs and DRs having underlying of instruments which can be issued under Schedule 5, being in the nature of debt, shall not be treated as foreign investment. However, any equity holding by a person resident outside India resulting from conversion of any debt instrument under any arrangement shall be reckoned as foreign investment under the composite cap. Sectoral cap is as per table appended below.
Total foreign investment, direct and/or indirect, in an entity will not exceed the sectoral/statutory cap.
Foreign investment in sectors under Government approval route resulting in transfer of ownership and/or control of Indian entities from resident Indian citizens to non-resident entities will be subject to Government approval. Foreign investment in sectors under automatic route but with conditionalities, resulting in transfer of ownership and/or control of Indian entities from resident Indian citizens to non-resident entities, will be subject to compliance of such conditionalities.
Notwithstanding anything contained in paragraphs (a), (b) and (e) above, portfolio investment upto aggregate foreign investment level of 49% or sectoral/statutory cap, whichever is lower, will not be subject to either Government approval or compliance of sectoral conditions, as the case may be, if such investment does not result in transfer of ownership and/or control of Indian entities from resident Indian citizens to non-resident entities. Other foreign investments will be subject to conditions of Government approval and compliance of sectoral conditions as laid down in the FDI policy.
The onus of compliance with the sectoral/statutory caps on foreign investment and attendant conditions, if any, shall be on the company receiving foreign investment.
(ii) In the existing provision, for the words, “ Provided”, the words “Provided further” shall be substituted.
(iii) In the Foreign Exchange Management (Transfer or Issue of Security by a Person Resident outside India) Regulations, 2000, (Notification No.FEMA 20/2000-RB dated 3rd May 2000), in Schedule 1, Annex B shall be substituted as under:
Foreign Investments caps and entry route in various sectors
SL.No
Sector/Activity
Foreign Investment Cap (%)
Entry Route
Agriculture
1.
Agriculture & Animal Husbandry
Floriculture, horticulture, Apiculture and Cultivation Of vegetables & mushrooms under controlled conditions;
Development and production of seeds and planting ma­terial;
Animal Husbandry (including breeding of dogs), Pisiculture, Aquaculture, under controlled conditions; and
Services related to agro and allied sectors.
Note : Besides the above, FDI is not allowed in any other agricultural sector/activity
100%
Automatic
1.1
Other Conditions
I. For companies dealing with development of transgenic seeds/vegetables, the following conditions apply:
(i) When dealing with genetically modified seeds or planting material the company shall comply with safety requirements in accordance with laws enacted under the Environment (Protection) Act on the genetically modified organisms.
(ii) Any import of genetically modified materials if required shall be subject to the conditions laid down vide Notifications issued under Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992.
(iii) The company shall comply with any other Law, Regulation or Policy governing genetically modified material in force from time to time.
(iv) Undertaking of business activities involving the use of genetically engineered cells and material shall be subject to the receipt of approvals from Genetic Engineering Approval Committee (GEAC) and Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM).
(v) Import of materials shall be in accordance with National Seeds Policy.
II. The term ‘under controlled conditions’ covers the following:
(i) ‘Cultivation under controlled conditions’ for the categories of Floriculture, Horticulture, Cultivation of vegetables and Mushrooms is the practice of cultivation wherein rainfall, temperature, solar radiation, air humidity and culture medium are controlled artificially. Control in these parameters may be effected through protected cultivation under green houses, net houses, poly houses or any other improved infrastructure facilities where micro- climatic conditions are regulated anthropogenically.
(ii) In case of Animal Husbandry, scope of the term ‘under controlled conditions’ covers –
(a) Rearing of animals under intensive farming systems with stall- feeding. Intensive farming system will require climate systems (ventilation, temperature/humidity management), health care and nutrition, herd registering/pedigree recording, use of machinery, waste management systems as prescribed by the National Livestock Policy 2013 and in conformity with the existing ‘Standard Operating Practices and Minimum Standard Protocol.”
(b) Poultry breeding farms and hatcheries where micro-climate is controlled through advanced technologies like incubators, ventilation systems etc.
(iii) In the case of pisciculture and aquaculture, scope of the term ‘under controlled conditions’ covers –
(a) Aquariums
(b) Hatcheries where eggs are artificially fertilized and fry are hatched and incubated in an enclosed environment with artificial climate control.
(iv) In the case of apiculture, scope of the term ‘‘under controlled conditions’ covers –Production of honey by bee-keeping, except in forest/wild, in designated spaces with control of emperatures and climatic factors like humidity and artificial feeding during lean seasons.
2.
Tea Plantation
2.1
Tea sector including tea plantations
Note: Besides the above, FDI is not allowed in any other plantation sector/activity
100%
Government
2.2
Other Condition
Prior approval of the State Government concerned is required in case of any future land use change
3.
MINING
3.1
Mining and Exploration of metal and non-metal ores including diamond, gold, silver and precious ores but excluding titanium bearing minerals and its ores; subject to the Mines and Minerals (Development & Regulation) Act, 1957.
100%
Automatic
3.2
Coal and Lignite
(1) Coal & Lignite mining for captive consumption by power projects, iron & steel and cement units and other eligible activities permitted under and subject to the provisions of Coal Mines (Nationalization) Act, 1973.
100%
Automatic
(2) Setting up coal processing plants like washeries, subject to the condition that the company shall not do coal mining and shall not sell washed coal or sized coal from its coal processing plants in the open market and shall supply the washed or sized coal to those parties who are supplying raw coal to coal processing plants for washing or sizing.
100%
Automatic
3.3
Mining and mineral separation of titanium bearing minerals and ores, its value addition and integrated activities
3.3.1
Mining and mineral separation of titanium bearing minerals & ores, its value addition and integrated activities subject to sectoral regulations and the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957.
100%
Government
3.3.2
Other Conditions
India has large reserves of beach sand minerals in the coastal stretches around the country. Titanium bearing minerals viz. Ilmenite, rutile and leucoxene and Zirconium bearing minerals including zircon are some of the beach sand minerals which have been classified as 'prescribed substances' under the Atomic Energy Act, 1962.
Under the Industrial Policy Statement 1991, mining and production of minerals classified as 'prescribed substances' and specified in the Schedule to the Atomic Energy (Control of Production and Use) Order, 1953 were included in the list of industries reserved for the public sector. Vide Resolution No. 8/1(1)/97- PSU /1422 dated 6th October, 1998 issued by the Department of Atomic Energy laying down the policy for exploitation of beach sand minerals, private participation including Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), was permitted in mining and production of Titanium ores (Ilmenite, Rutile and Leucoxene) and Zirconium minerals (Zircon).
Vide Notification No. S.O. 61(E), dated 18-1-2006, the Department of Atomic Energy re-notified the list of 'prescribed substances' under the Atomic Energy Act, 1962. Titanium bearing ores and concentrates (Ilmenite, Rutile and Leucoxene) and Zirconium, its alloys and compounds and minerals/ concentrates including Zircon, were removed from the list of 'prescribed substances'.
(i) FDI for separation of titanium bearing minerals & ores will be subject to the following additional conditions viz:
(A) value addition facilities are set up within India along with transfer of technology;
(B) disposal of tailings during the mineral separation shall be carried out in accordance with regulations framed by the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board such as Atomic Energy (Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004 and the Atomic Energy (Safe Disposal of Radioactive Wastes) Rules, 1987.
(ii) FDI will not be allowed in mining of 'prescribed substances' listed in the Notification No. SO 61(E), dated 18-1-2006 issued by the Department of Atomic Energy.
Clarification:(1) For titanium bearing ores such as Ilmenite, Leucoxene and Rutile, manufacture of titanium dioxide pigment and titanium sponge constitutes value addition, Ilmenite can be processed to produce Synthetic Rutile or Titanium Slag as an intermediate value added product.
(2) The objective is to ensure that the raw material available in the country is utilized for setting up downstream industries and the technology available internationally is also made available for setting up such industries within the country. Thus, if with the technology transfer, the objective of the FDI Policy can be achieved, the conditions prescribed at (I) (A) above shall be deemed to be fulfilled.
4.
Petroleum & Natural Gas
4.1
Exploration activities of oil and natural gas fields, infrastructure related to marketing of petroleum products and natural gas, marketing of natural gas and petroleum products, petroleum product pipelines, natural gas/pipelines, LNG Regasification infrastructure, market study and formulation and Petroleum refining in the private sector, subject to the existing sectoral policy and regulatory framework in the oil marketing sector and the policy of the Government on private participation in exploration of oil and the discovered fields of national oil companies.
100%
Automatic
4.2
Petroleum refining by the Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs), without any disinvestment or dilution of domestic equity in the existing PSUs.
49%
Automatic
5.
Defence
5.1
Defence Industry subject to Industrial license under the Industries (Development & Regulation) Act, 1951
49%
Government route up to 49% Above 49% to Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) on case to case basis, wherever it is likely to result in access to modern and 'state-of-art' technology in the country.
Note: (i) The above limit of 49% is composite and includes all kinds of foreign investments i.e. Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), Foreign Institutional Investors (FIIs), Foreign Portfolio Investors (FPIs), Non Resident Indians (NRIs) and Foreign Venture Capital Investors (FVCI) regardless of whether the said investments have been made under Schedule 1 (FDI), 2 (FII), 2A (FPI), 3 (NRI),6 (FVCI) and 8 (QFI) of FEMA (Transfer or Issue of Security by Persons Resident Outside India) Regulations.
(ii) Portfolio investment by FPIs/FIIs/NRIs and investments by FVCIs together will not exceed 24% of the total equity of the investee/joint venture company. Portfolio investments will be under automatic route.
5.2
Other Conditions
Licence applications will be considered and licences given by the Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion, Ministry of Commerce & Industry, in consultation with Ministry of Defence and Ministry of External Affairs.
The applicant company seeking permission of the Government for FDI up to 49% should be an Indian company owned and controlled by resident Indian citizens.
The management of the applicant company should be in Indian hands with majority representation on the Board as well as the Chief Executives of the company/partnership firm being resident Indians.
Chief Security Officer (CSO) of the investee/ joint venture company should be resident Indian citizen.
Full particulars of the Directors and the Chief Executives should be furnished along with the applications.
The Government reserves the right to verify the antecedents of the foreign collaborators and domestic promoters including their financial standing and credentials in the world market. Preference would be given to original equipment manufacturers or design establishments and companies having a good track record of past supplies to Armed Forces, Space and Atomic energy sections and having an established R & D base.
There would be no minimum capitalization for the FDI. A proper assessment, however, needs to be done by the management of the applicant company depending upon the product and the technology. The licensing authority would satisfy itself about the adequacy of the net worth of the non-resident investor taking into account the category of weapons and equipment that are proposed to be manufactured.
The Ministry of Defence is not in a position to give purchase guarantee for products to be manufactured. However, the planned acquisition programme for such equipment and overall requirements would be made available to the extent possible.
Investee/joint venture company should be structured to be self-sufficient in areas of product design and development. The investee/joint venture company along with manufacturing facility, should also have maintenance and life cycle support facility of the product being manufactured in India.
Import of equipment for pre-production activity including development of prototype by the applicant company would be permitted.
Adequate safety and security procedures would need to be put in place by the licensee once the licence is granted and production commences. These would be subject to verification by authorized Government agencies.
The standards and testing procedures for equipment to be produced under licence from foreign collaborators or from indigenous R & D will have to be provided by the licensee to the Government nominated quality assurance agency under appropriate confidentiality clause. The nominated quality assurance agency would inspect the finished product and would conduct surveillance and audit of the Quality Assurance Procedures of the licensee. Self-certification would be permitted by the Ministry of Defence on case to case basis, which may involve either individual items, or group of items manufactured by the licensee. Such permission would be for a fixed period and subject to renewals.
Purchase preference and price preference may be given to the Public Sector organizations as per guidelines of the Department of Public Enterprises.
The Licensee shall be allowed to sell Defence items to Government entities under the control of Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), State Governments, Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) and other valid Defence Licensed Companies without prior approval of the Department of Defence Production (DoDP). However, for sale of the items to any other entity, the Licensee shall take prior permission from the Department of Defence Production, Ministry of Defence.
All applications seeking permission of the Government for FDI in defence would be made to the Secretariat of Foreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB) in the Department of Economic Affairs.
Applications for FDI up to 49% will follow the existing procedure with proposals involving inflows in excess of Rs. 3000 crore being approved by Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA).
Based on the recommendation of the Ministry of Defence and FIPB, approval of the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) will be sought by the Ministry of Defence in respect of cases seeking permission of the Government for FDI beyond 49% which are likely to result in access to modern and `state-of-art' technology in the country.
Proposals for FDI beyond 49% with proposed inflow in excess of Rs. 3000 crores, which are to be approved by CCS will not require further approval of the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA).
Government decision on applications for FDI in defence industry sector will be normally communicated within a time frame of 10 weeks from the date of acknowledgement.
For the proposal seeking Government approval for foreign investment beyond 49% applicant should be Indian company/foreign investor. Further condition at para (iii) above will not apply on such proposals.
Services Sector
Information Services
6.
Broadcasting
6.1
Broadcasting Carriage Services
6.1.1
Teleports (setting up of up-linking HUBs/Teleports);
Direct to Home (DTH);
Cable Networks [Multi System Operators (MSOs) operating at National or State or District level and undertaking up gradation of networks towards digitalization and addressability]:
Mobile TV;
Headend-in-the Sky Broadcasting Service (HITS)
74%
Automatic up to 49%
Government route beyond 49% and up to 74%
6.1.2
Cable Networks
(Other MSOs not undertaking upgradation of networks towards digitalization and addressability and Local Cable Operators (LCOs)).
49%
Automatic
6.2
Broadcasting Content Services
6.2.1
Terrestrial Broadcasting FM (FM Radio),
subject to such terms and conditions, as specified from time to time, by Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, for grant of permission for setting up of FM Radio stations.
26%
Government
6.2.2
Up-Linking of ‘News & Current Affairs’ TV Channels
26%
Government
6.2.3
Up-linking a Non-'News & Current Affairs' TV Channels/Down-linking of TV Channels
100%
Government
6.3
FDI for Up-linking/Down-linking TV Channels will be subject to compliance with the relevant Up-linking/Down-linking Policy notified by the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting from time to time.
6.4
Foreign Investment (FI) in companies engaged in all the aforestated services will be subject to relevant regulations and such terms and conditions, as may be specified from time to time, by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.
6.5
The foreign investment (FI) limit in companies engaged in the afore stated activities shall include, in addition to FDI, investment by Foreign Institutional Investors (FIIs), Foreign Portfolio Investors(FPIs), Non-Resident Indians (NRIs), Foreign Currency Convertible Bonds (FCCBs), [ Depository Receipts issued under Schedule 10 of these Regulations with equity shares or compulsorily and mandatorily convertible preference shares or compulsory and mandatorily convertible debentures or warrant or any other security in which foreign direct investment can be made in terms of Schedule1 of the principal Regulations, as underlying] (GDRs) and convertible preference shares held by foreign entities.]
6.6
Foreign investment in the aforestated broadcasting carriage services will be subject to the following security conditions/ terms:
Mandatory Requirement for Key Executives of the Company
(i) The majority of Directors on the Board of the Company shall be Indian Citizens.
(ii) The Chief Executive Officer (CEO), Chief Officer In-charge of technical network operations and Chief Security Officer should be resident Indian citizens
Security Clearance of Personnel
(iii) The Company, all Directors on the Board of Directors and such key executives like Managing Director/ Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer (CFO), Chief Security Officer (CSO), Chief Technical Officer (CTO), Chief Operating Officer (COO), shareholders who individually hold 10% or more paid-up capital in the company and any other category, as may be specified by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting from time to time, shall require to be security cleared.
In case of the appointment of Directors on the Board of the Company and such key executives like Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer (CFO), Chief Security Officer (CSO), Chief Technical Officer (CTO), Chief Operating Officer (COO), etc., as may be specified by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting from time to time, prior permission of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting shall have to be obtained.
It shall be obligatory on the part of the company to also take prior permission from the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting before effecting any change in the Board of Directors.
(iv) The Company shall be required to obtain security clearance of all foreign personnel likely to be deployed for more than 60 days in a year by way of appointment, contract, and consultancy or in any other capacity for installation, maintenance, operation or any other services prior to their deployment. The security clearance shall be required to be obtained every two years.
Permission vis-a-vis Security Clearance
(v) The permission shall be subject to permission holder/licensee remaining security cleared throughout the currency of permission. In case the security clearance is withdrawn the permission granted is liable to be terminated forthwith.
(vi) In the event of security clearance of any of the persons associated with the permission holder/licensee or foreign personnel being denied or withdrawn for any reasons whatsoever, the permission holder/licensee will ensure that the concerned person resigns or his services terminated forthwith after receiving such directives from the Government, failing which the permission/license granted shall be revoked and the company shall be disqualified to hold any such Permission/license in future for a period of five years.
Infrastructure/Network/Software related requirement
(vii) The officers/officials of the licensee companies dealing with the lawful interception of Services will be resident Indian citizens.
(viii) Details of infrastructure/ network diagram (technical details of the network) could be provided on a need basis only, to equipment suppliers/manufactures and the affiliate of the licensee company. Clearance from the licensor would be required if such information is to be provided to anybody else.
(ix) The Company shall not transfer the subscribers' databases to any person/place outside India unless permitted by relevant Law.
(x) The Company must provide traceable identity of their subscribers.
Monitoring, Inspection and Submission of Information
(xi) The Company should ensure that necessary provision (hardware/software) is available in their equipment for doing the Lawful interception and monitoring from a centralized location as and when required by Government.
(xii) The company, at its own costs, shall, on demand by the Government or its authorized representative, provide the necessary equipment, services and facilities at designated place(s) for continuous monitoring or the broadcasting service by or under supervision of the Government or its authorized representative.
(xiii) The Government of India, Ministry of Information & Broadcasting or its authorized representative shall have the right to inspect the broadcasting facilities. No prior permission/intimation shall be required to exercise the right of Government or its authorized representative to carry out the inspection. The company will, if required by the Government or its authorized representative, provide necessary facilities for continuous monitoring for any particular aspect of the company's activities and operations. Continuous monitoring, however, will be confined only to security related aspects, including screening of objectionable content.
(xiv) The inspection will ordinarily be carried out by the Government of India, Ministry of Information & Broadcasting or its authorized representative after reasonable notice, except in circumstances where giving such a notice will defeat the very purpose of the inspection.
(xv) The company shall submit such information with respect to its services as may be required by the Government or its authorized representative, in the format as may be required, from time to time.
(xvi) The permission holder/licensee shall be liable to furnish the Government of India or its authorized representative or TRAI or its authorized representative, such reports, accounts, estimates, returns or such other relevant information and at such periodic intervals or such times as may be required.
(xvii) The service providers should familiarize/train designated officials of the Government or officials of TRAI or its authorized representative(s) in respect of relevant operations/features of their systems.
National Security Conditions
(xviii) It shall be open to the licensor to restrict the Licensee Company from operating in any sensitive area from the National Security angle. The Government of India, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting shall have the right to temporarily suspend the permission of the permission holder/Licensee in public interest or for national security for such period or periods as it may direct. The company shall immediately comply with any directives issued in this regard failing which the permission issued shall be revoked and the company disqualified to hold any such permission, in future, for a period of five years.
(xix) The company shall not import or utilize any equipment, which are identified as unlawful and/or render network security vulnerable.
Other conditions
(xx) Licensor reserves the right to modify these conditions or incorporate new conditions considered necessary in the interest of national security and public interest or for proper provision of broadcasting services.
(xxi) Licensee will ensure that broadcasting service installation carried out by it should not become a safety hazard and is not in contravention of any statute, rule or regulation and public policy.
7.
Print Media
7.1
Publishing of newspaper and periodicals dealing with news and current affairs
26%
Government
7.2
Publication of Indian editions of foreign magazines dealing with news and current affairs
26%
Government
7.2.1
Other conditions
(i) 'Magazine', for the purpose of these guidelines, will be defined as a periodical publication, brought out on non-daily basis, containing public news or comments on public news.
(ii) Foreign investment would also be subject to the Guidelines for Publication of Indian editions of foreign magazines dealing with news and current affairs issued by the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting on 4-12-2008.
7.3
Publishing/printing of Scientific and Technical Magazines/specialty journals/periodicals, subject to compliance with the legal framework as applicable and guidelines issued in this regard from time to time by Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.
100%
Government
7.4
Publication of facsimile edition of foreign newspapers
100%
Government
7.4.1
Other conditions:
(i) FDI should be made by the owner of the original foreign newspapers whose facsimile edition is proposed to be brought out in India.
(ii) Publication of facsimile edition of foreign newspapers can be undertaken only by an entity incorporated or registered in India under the provisions of the Companies Act, as applicable.
(iii) Publication of facsimile edition of foreign newspaper would also be subject to the Guidelines for publication of newspapers and periodicals dealing with news and current affairs and publication of facsimile edition of foreign newspapers issued by Ministry of Information & Broadcasting on 31-3-2006, as amended from time to time.
8.
Civil Aviation
8.1
The Civil Aviation sector includes Airports, Scheduled and Non-Scheduled domestic passenger airlines, Helicopter services/Seaplane services, Ground Handling Services, Maintenance and Repair organizations; Flying training institutes; and Technical training institutions.
For the purposes of the Civil Aviation sector:
(i) "Airport" means a landing and taking off area for aircrafts, usually with runways and aircraft maintenance and passenger facilities and includes aerodrome as defined in clause (2) of section 2 of the Aircraft Act, 1934;
(ii) "Aerodrome" means any definite or limited ground or water area intended to be used, either wholly or in part, for the landing or departure of aircraft, and includes all buildings, sheds, vessels, piers and other structures thereon or pertaining thereto;
(iii) "Air transport service" means a service for the transport by air of persons, mails or any other thing, animate or inanimate, for any kind of remuneration whatsoever, whether such service consists of a single flight or series of flights;
(iv) "Air Transport Undertaking" means an undertaking whose business includes the carriage by air of passengers or cargo for hire or reward;
(v) "Aircraft component" means any part, the soundness and correct functioning of which, when fitted to an aircraft, is essential to the continued airworthiness or safety of the aircraft and includes any item of equipment;
(vi) "Helicopter" means a heavier than air aircraft supported in flight by the reactions of the air on one or more power driven rotors on substantially vertical axis;
(vii) "Scheduled air transport service" means an air transport service undertaken between the same two or more places and operated according to a published time table or with flights so regular or frequent that they constitute a recognizably systematic series, each flight being open to use by members of the public;
(viii) "Non-Scheduled air Transport service" means any service which is not a scheduled air transport service and will include Cargo airlines;
(ix) "Cargo airlines" would mean such airlines which meet the conditions as given in the Civil Aviation Requirements issued by the Ministry of Civil Aviation;
(x) "Seaplane" means an aeroplane capable normally of taking off from and alighting solely on water;
(xi) "Ground Handling" means (i) ramp handling, (ii) traffic handling both of which shall include the activities as specified by the Ministry of Civil Aviation through the Aeronautical Information Circulars from time to time, and (iii) any other activity specified by the Central Government to be a part of either ramp handling or traffic handling.
8.2
Airports
(a) Greenfield projects
(b) Existing projects
100%
100%
Automatic
Automatic upto 74% ; Government
Route beyond 74%
8.3
Air Transport Services
(1) Scheduled Air Transport Service/Domestic Scheduled Passenger Airline
49% (100% for NRIs)
Automatic
(2) Non-Scheduled Air Transport Service
74% (100% for NRIs)
Automatic upto 49%; Government
Route beyond 49% and up to 74%
(3) Helicopter services/ seaplane services requiring DGCA approval
100%
Automatic
8.3.1
Other Conditions
(a) Air Transport Services would include Domestic Scheduled Passenger Airlines; Non-Scheduled Air Transport Services, helicopter and seaplane services.
(b) Foreign airlines are allowed to participate in the equity of companies operating Cargo airlines, helicopter and seaplane services, as per the limits and entry routes mentioned above.
(c) Foreign airlines are also allowed to invest in the capital of Indian companies, operating scheduled and non-scheduled air transport services, up to the limit of 49% of their paid-up capital. Such investment would be subject to the following conditions:
(i) It would be made under the Government approval route.
(ii) The 49% limit will subsume FDI and FII/FPI investment.
(iii) The investments so made would need to comply with the relevant regulations of SEBI, such as the Issue of Capital and Disclosure Requirements (ICDR) Regulations/ Substantial Acquisition of Shares and Takeovers (SAST) Regulations, as well as other applicable rules and regulations.
(iv) A Scheduled Operator's Permit can be granted only to a company:
that is registered and has its principal place of business within India;
the Chairman and at least two-thirds of the Directors of which are citizens of India; and
the substantial ownership and effective control of which is vested in Indian nationals.
(v) All foreign nationals likely to be associated with Indian scheduled and non-scheduled air transport services, as a result of such investment shall be cleared from security view point before deployment; and
(vi) All technical equipment that might be imported into India as a result of such investment shall require clearance from the relevant authority in the Ministry of Civil Aviation.
Note: (i) The FDI limits/entry routes, mentioned at paragraph 8.3(1) and 8.3(2) above, are applicable in the situation where there is no investment by foreign airlines
.
(ii) The dispensation for NRIs regarding FDI up to 100% will also continue in respect of the investment regime specified at paragraph 8.3.1(c) (ii) above.
(iii) The policy mentioned at 8.3.1(c) above is not applicable to M/s Air India Limited
8.3.2
Foreign Airlines in the capital of the Indian companies, operating schedule and non-scheduled air transport services
49% (100% for NRIs)
Government
8.4
Other Services under Civil Aviation sector
(1) Ground Handling Services subject to sectoral regulations and security clearance
74% (100% for NRIs)
Automatic upto 49%; Government
Route beyond 49% and up to 74%
(2) Maintenance and Repair organizations; flying training institutes and technical training institutions
100%
Automatic
9.
Courier services
for carrying packages, parcels and other items which do not come within the ambit of the Indian Post
Office Act, 1898 and excluding the activity relating to the distribution of letters
100%
Automatic
10.
Construction Development: Townships, Housing, Built-up infrastructure
10.1
Construction-development projects (which would include development of townships, construction of residential/commercial premises, roads or bridges, hotels, resorts, hospitals, educational institutions, recreational facilities, city and regional level infrastructure, townships)
100%
Automatic
Investment will be subject to the following conditions:
(A) Minimum area to be developed under each project would be as under:
In case of development of serviced plots, no minimum land area requirement.
In case of construction-development projects, a minimum floor area of 20,000 sq. meter.
(B) Investee company will be required to bring minimum FDI of US$ 5 million within six months of commencement of the project. The commencement of the project will be the date of approval of the building plan/layout plan by the relevant statutory authority. Subsequent tranches of FDI can be brought till the period of ten years from the commencement of the project or before the completion of project, whichever expires earlier.
(C) (i) The investor will be permitted to exit on completion of the project or after development of trunk infrastructure i.e. roads, water supply, street lighting, drainage and sewerage.
(ii) The Government may, in view of facts and circumstances of a case, permit repatriation of FDI or transfer of stake by one non-resident investor to another non-resident investor, before the completion of project. These proposals will be considered by FIPB on case to case basis inter-alia with specific reference to Note (i).
(D) The project shall conform to the norms and standards, including land use requirements and provision of community amenities and common facilities, as laid down in the applicable building control regulations, bye-laws, rules, and other regulations of the State Government/Municipal/Local Body concerned.
(E) The Indian investee company will be permitted to sell only developed plots. For the purposes of this policy "developed plots" will mean plots where trunk infrastructure i.e. roads, water supply, street lighting, drainage and sewerage, have been made available.
(F) The Indian investee company shall be responsible for obtaining all necessary approvals, including those of the building/layout plans, developing internal and peripheral areas and other infrastructure facilities, payment of development, external development and other charges and complying with all other requirements as prescribed under applicable rules/bye-laws/regulations of the State Government/ Municipal/Local Body concerned.
(G) The State Government/ Municipal/ Local Body concerned, which approves the building / development plans, will monitor compliance of the above conditions by the developer.
Note:
(i) It is clarified that FDI is not permitted in an entity which is engaged or proposes to engage in real estate business, construction of farm houses and trading in transferable development rights (TDRs).
"Real estate business" will have the same meaning as provided in FEMA Notification No. 1/2000-RB dated May 03, 2000 read with RBI Master Circular i.e. dealing in land and immovable property with a view to earning profit or earning income there from and does not include development of townships, construction of residential/ commercial premises, roads or bridges, educational institutions, recreational facilities, city and regional level infrastructure, townships.
(ii) The conditions at (A) to (C) above, will not apply to Hotels & Tourist Resorts; Hospitals; Special Economic Zones (SEZs); Educational Institutions, Old Age Homes and Investment by NRIs.
(iii) The conditions at (A) and (B) above, will also not apply to investee/joint venture companies which commit at least 30 percent of the total project cost for low cost affordable housing.
(iv) An Indian company, which is the recipient of FDI, shall procure a certificate from an architect empanelled by any Authority, authorized to sanction building plan to the effect that the minimum floor area requirement has been fulfilled.
(v) 'Floor area' will be defined as per the local laws/regulations of the respective State governments/Union territories.
(vi) Completion of the project will be determined as per the local bye-laws/ rules and other regulations of State Governments.
(vii) Project using at least 40% of the FAR/FSI for dwelling unit of floor area of not more than 140 square meter will be considered as Affordable Housing Project for the purpose of FDI policy in Construction Development Sector. Out of the total FAR/ FSI reserved for Affordable Housing, at least one-fourth should be for houses of floor area of not more than 60 square meter.
(viii) It is clarified that 100% FDI under automatic route is permitted in completed projects for operation and management of townships, malls/ shopping complexes and business centres.
11.
Industrial Parks -New and existing
100%
Automatic
11.1
(i) "Industrial Park" is a project in which quality infrastructure in the form of plots of developed land or built up space or a combination with common facilities, is developed and made available to all the allottee units for the purposes of industrial activity.
(ii) “Infrastructure” refers to facilities required for functioning of units located in the Industrial Park and includes roads (including approach roads), railway line/sidings including electrified railway lines and connectivities to the main railway line, water supply and sewerage, common effluent treatment facility, telecom network, generation and distribution of power, air conditioning.
(iii) “Common Facilities” refer to the facilities available for all the units located in the industrial park, and include facilities of power, roads (including approach roads), railway line/sidings including electrified railway lines and connectivities to the main railway line, water supply and sewerage, common effluent treatment, common testing, telecom services, air conditioning, common facility buildings, industrial canteens, convention/conference halls, parking, travel desks, security service, first aid center, ambulance and other safety services, training facilities and such other facilities meant for common use of the units located in the Industrial Park.
(iv) "Allocable area" in the Industrial Park means-
(a) in the case of plots of developed land - the net site area available for allocation to the units, excluding the area for common facilities.
(b) in the case of built up space - the floor area and built-up space utilized for providing common facilities.
(c) in the case of a combination of developed land and built-up space - the net site and floor area available for allocation to the units excluding the site area and built-up space utilized for providing common facilities.
(v) "Industrial Activity" means manufacturing; electricity; gas and water supply; post and telecommunications; software publishing, consultancy and supply; data processing, database activities and distribution of electronic content; other computer related activities; basic and applied R&D on bio-technology, pharmaceutical sciences/life sciences, natural sciences and engineering; business and management consultancy activities; and architectural, engineering and other technical activities.
11.2
FDI in Industrial Parks would not be subject to the conditionalities applicable for construction development projects etc. spelt out in para 11 above, provided the Industrial Parks meet with the under-mentioned conditions:
(i) it would comprise of a minimum of 10 units and no single unit shall occupy more than 50% of the allocable area;
(ii) the minimum percentage of the area to be allocated for industrial activity shall not be less than 66% of the total allocable area.
12.
Satellites - Establishment and operation
12.1
Satellites Establishment and operation, subject to the sectoral guidelines of Department of Space/ISRO
74%
Government
13.
Private Security Agencies
49%
Government
14.
Telecom services
(including Telecom Infrastructure Providers Category-l)
All telecom services including Telecom Infrastructure Providers Category-I, viz. Basic, Cellular, United Access Services, Unified license (Access services), Unified License, National/ International Long Distance, Commercial V-Sat, Public Mobile Radio Trunked Services (PMRTS), Global Mobile Personal Communications Services (GMPCS), All types of ISP licenses, Voice Mail/Audiotex / UMS, Resale of IPLC, Mobile Number Portability services, Infrastructure Provider Category-I (providing dark fibre, right of way, duct space, tower) except Other Service Providers.
100%
Automatic upto 49%
Government route beyond 49%
14.1.1
Other Condition
FDI up to 100% with 49% on the automatic route and beyond 49% on the government route subject to observance of licensing and security conditions by licensee as well as investors as notified by the Department of Telecommunications (DoT) from time to time, expect “Other Service Providers”, which are allowed 100% FDI on the automatic route.
15.
Trading
15.1
(i) Cash & Carry Wholesale Trading/Wholesale Trading (including sourcing from MSEs)
100%
Automatic
15.1.1
Definition: Cash & Carry Wholesale trading/Wholesale trading, would mean sale of goods/merchandise to retailers, industrial, commercial, institutional or other professional business users or to other wholesalers and related subordinated service providers. Wholesale trading would, accordingly, imply sales for the purpose of trade, business and profession, as opposed to sales for the purpose of personal consumption. The yardstick to determine whether the sale is wholesale or not would be the type of customers to whom the sale is made and not the size and volume of sales. Wholesale trading would include resale, processing and thereafter sale, bulk imports with ex-port/ ex-bonded warehouse business sales and B2B e-Commerce.
15.1.2
Guidelines for Cash & Carry Wholesale Trading/Wholesale Trading (WT):
(a) For undertaking ‘WT', requisite licenses/registration/permits, as specified under the relevant Acts/Regulations/Rules/Orders of the State Government/Government Body/Government Authority /Local Self-Government Body under that State Government should be obtained.
(b) Except in case of sales to Government, sales made by the wholesaler would be considered as 'cash & carry wholesale trading/wholesale trading' with valid business customers, only when WT are made to the following entities:
(i) Entities holding sales tax/VAT registration/service tax/excise duty registration; or
(ii) Entities holding trade licenses i.e. a license/registration certificate/membership certificate/registration under Shops and Establishment Act, issued by a Government Authority/Government Body/ Local Self-Government Authority, reflecting that the entity/person holding the license/registration certificate/membership certificate, as the case may be, is itself/himself/herself engaged in a business involving commercial activity; or
(iii) Entities holding permits/license etc. for undertaking retail trade (like tehbazari and similar license for hawkers) from Government Authorities/Local Self Government Bodies; or
(iv) Institutions having certificate of incorporation or registration as a society or registration as public trust for their self consumption.
Note: An Entity, to whom WT is made, may fulfil anyone of the 4 conditions.
(c) Full records indicating all the details of such sales like name of entity, kind of entity, registration/ license/permit etc. number, amount of sale etc. should be maintained on a day to day basis.
(d) WT of goods would be permitted among companies of the same group. However, such WT to group companies taken together should not exceed 25% of the total turnover of the wholesale venture.
(e) WT can be undertaken as per normal business practice, including extending credit facilities subject to applicable regulations.
(f) A Wholesale/Cash & carry trader cannot open retail shops to sell to the consumer directly.
15.2
B2B E-commerce activities
100%
Automatic
E-commerce activities refer to the activity of buying and selling by a company through the e-commerce platform. Such companies would engage only in Business to Business (B2B) e-commerce and not in retail trading, inter alia implying that existing restrictions on FDI in domestic trading would be applicable to e­commerce as well.
15.3
Single Brand product retail trading
100%
Automatic up to 49%. Government route beyond 49%
(1) Foreign Investment in Single Brand product retail trading is aimed at attracting investments in production and marketing, improving the availability of such goods for the consumer, encouraging increased sourcing of goods from India, and enhancing competitiveness of Indian enterprises through access to global designs, technologies and management practices.
(2) FDI in Single Brand product retail trading would be subject to the following conditions:
(a) Products to be sold should be of a 'Single Brand' only.
(b) Products should be sold under the same brand internationally i.e. products should be sold under the same brand in one or more countries other than India.
(c) 'Single Brand' product-retail trading would cover only products which are branded during manufacturing.
(d) A non-resident entity or entities, whether owner of the brand or otherwise, shall be permitted to undertake ‘single brand’ product retail trading in the country for the specific brand, directly or through a legally tenable agreement, with the brand owner for undertaking single brand product retail trading. The onus for ensuring compliance with this condition will rest with the Indian entity carrying out single-brand product retail trading in India. The investing entity shall provide evidence to this effect at the time of seeking approval, including a copy of the licensing/franchise/sub-licence agreement, specifically indicating compliance with the above condition. The requisite evidence should be filed with the RBI for the automatic route and SIA/FIPB for cases involving approval.
(e) In respect of proposals involving FDI beyond 51 %, sourcing of 30% of the value of goods purchased, will be done from India, preferably from MSMEs, village and cottage industries, artisans and craftsmen, in all sectors. The quantum of domestic sourcing will be self-certified by the company, to be subsequently checked, by statutory auditors, from the duly certified accounts which the company will be required to maintain. This procurement requirement would have to be met, in the first instance, as an average of five years; total value of the goods purchased, beginning 1st April of the year during which the first tranche of FDI is received. Thereafter, it would have to be met on an annual basis. For the purpose of ascertaining the sourcing requirement, the relevant entity would be the company, incorporated in India, which is the recipient of FDI for the purpose of carrying out single­brand product retail trading.
(f) Retail trading, in any form, by means of e-commerce, would not be permissible, for companies with FDI, engaged in the activity of single brand retail trading.
(3) Applications seeking permission of the Government for FDI exceeding 49% in a company which proposes to undertake single brand retail trading in India would be made to the Secretariat for Industrial Assistance (SIA) in the Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion. The applications would specifically indicate the product/ product categories which are proposed to be sold under a ‘Single Brand’. Any addition to the product/ product categories to be sold under ‘Single Brand’ would require a fresh approval of the Government. In case of FDI upto 49%, the list of products/ product categories proposed to be sold except food products would be provided to the RBI.
(4) Applications would be processed in the Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion, to determine whether the proposed investment satisfies the notified guidelines, before being considered by the FIPB for Government approval.
15.4
Multi Brand Retail Trading
51%
Government
(1) FDI in multi brand retail trading, in all products, will be permitted, subject to the following conditions:
(i) Fresh agricultural produce, including fruits, vegetables, flowers, grains, pulses, fresh poultry, fishery and meat products, may be unbranded.
(ii) Minimum amount to be brought in, as FDI, by the foreign investor, would be US $ 100 million.
(iii) At least 50% of total FDI brought in the first tranche of US $ 100 million, shall be invested in 'back-end infrastructure' within three years, where 'back-end infrastructure' will include capital expenditure on all activities, excluding that on front-end units; for instance, back-end infrastructure will include investment made towards processing, manufacturing, distribution, design improvement, quality control, packaging, logistics, storage, warehouse, agriculture market produce infrastructure etc. Expenditure on land cost and rentals, if any, will not be counted for purposes of back-end infrastructure. Subsequent investment in the back-end infrastructure would be made by the MBRT retailer as needed, depending upon its business requirements.
(iv) At least 30% of the value of procurement of manufactured/processed products purchased shall be sourced from Indian micro, small and medium industries, which have a total investment in plant & machinery not exceeding US $ 2.00 million. This valuation refers to the value at the time of installation, without providing for depreciation. The 'small industry' status would be reckoned only at the time of first engagement with the retailer and such industry shall continue to qualify as a 'small industry' for this purpose, even if it outgrows the said investment of US $ 2.00 million during the course of its relationship with the said retailer. Sourcing from agricultural co-operatives and farmers co-operatives would also be considered in this category. The procurement requirement would have to be met, in the first instance, as an average of five years total value of the manufactured/processed products purchased, beginning lst April of the year during which the first tranche of FDI is received. Thereafter, it would have to be met on an annual basis.
(v) Self-certification by the company, to ensure compliance of the conditions at serial Nos. (i), (ii) and (iv) above, which could be cross-checked, as and when required. Accordingly, the investors shall maintain accounts, duly certified by statutory auditors.
(vi) Retail sales outlets may be set up only in cities with a population of more than 10 lakh as per the 2011 Census or any other cities as per the decision of the respective State Governments, and may also cover an area of 10 kms. Around the municipal/urban agglomeration limits of such cities; retail locations will be restricted to conforming areas as per the Master/Zonal Plans of the concerned cities and provision will be made for requisite facilities such as transport connectivity and parking.
(vii) Government will have the first right to procurement of agricultural products.
(viii) The above policy is an enabling policy only and the State Governments/Union Territories would be free to take their own decisions in regard to implementation of the policy. Therefore, retail sales outlets may be set up in those States/Union Territories which have agreed, or agree in future, to allow FDI in MBRT under this policy. The list of States/Union Territories which have conveyed their agreement is at (2) below. Such agreement, in future, to permit establishment of retail outlets under this policy, would be conveyed to the Government of India through the Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion and additions would be made to the list at (2) below accordingly. The establishment of the retail sales outlets will be in compliance of applicable State/Union Territory laws/ regulations, such as the Shops and Establishments Act etc.
(ix) Retail trading, in any form, by means of e-commerce, would not be permissible, for companies with FDI, engaged in the activity of multi-brand retail trading.
(x) Applications would be processed in the Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion, to determine whether the proposed investment satisfies the notified guidelines, before being considered by the FIPB for Government approval.
(2) List of States/Union Territories as mentioned in Paragraph 16.4.(1) (viii)
1.Andhra Pradesh
2.Assam
3.Delhi
4.Haryana
5.Himachal Pradesh
6.Jammu & Kashmir
7. Karnataka
8.Maharashtra
9.Manipur
10.Rajasthan
11.Uttarakhand
12.Daman & Diu and Dadra and Nagar Haveli (Union Territories)
FINANCIAL SERVICES
Foreign investment in other financial services, other than those indicated below, would require prior approval of the Government:
F.1
Asset Reconstruction Companies
F.1.1
‘Asset Reconstruction Company’ (ARC) means a company registered with the Reserve Bank of India under Section 3 of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (SARFAESI Act).
100%
Automatic up to 49%
Government route beyond 49%
F.1.1.2
Other Conditions
(i) Persons resident outside India can invest in the capital of Asset Reconstruction Companies (ARCs) registered with Reserve Bank, up to 49% on the automatic route, and beyond 49% on the Government route.
(ii) No sponsor may hold more than 50% of the shareholding in an ARC either by way of FDI or by routing it through an FII/FPI controlled by the single sponsor.
(iii) The total shareholding of an individual FII/FPI shall be below 10% of the total paid-up capital.
(iv) FIIs/FPIs can invest in the Security Receipts (SRs) issued by ARCs registered with Reserve Bank. FIIs/FPIs can invest up to 74 per cent of each tranche of scheme of SRs. Such investment should be within the FII/FPI limit on corporate bonds prescribed from time to time, and sectoral caps under extant FDI Regulations should also be complied with.
(v) All investments would be subject to provisions of section 3(3) (f) of Securitization and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002.
F.2
Banking - Private sector
F.2.1
Banking - Private sector
This 74% limit will include investment under the Portfolio Investment Scheme (PIS) by FIIs/FPIs, NRIs and shares acquired prior to September 16, 2003 by erstwhile OCBs, and continue to include IPOs, Private placements, GDR/ADRs and acquisition of shares from existing shareholders.
74% ( FII/FPI upto 49%)
Automatic upto 49%
Government route beyond 49% and upto 74%
F.2.2
Other conditions:
(1) The aggregate foreign investment in a private bank from all sources will be allowed - up to a maximum of 74 per cent of the paid-up capital of the Bank. At all times, at least 26 per cent of the paid up capital will have to be held by residents, except in regard to a wholly-owned subsidiary of a foreign bank.
(2) The stipulations as above will be applicable to all investments in existing private sector banks also.
(3) The permissible limits under portfolio investment schemes through stock exchanges for FIIs/FPIs and NRIs will be as follows:
(i) In the case of FIIs/FPIs, as hitherto, individual FII/FPI holding is restricted to below 10 per cent of the total paid-up capital, aggregate limit for all FIIs/FPIs/QFIs cannot exceed 24 per cent of the total paid-up capital, which can be raised to 49 per cent of the total paid-up capital by the bank concerned through a resolution by its Board of Directors followed by a special resolution to that effect by its General Body.
(a) Thus, the FII/FPI investment limit will continue to be within 49 per cent of the total paid-up capital.
(b) In the case of NRIs, as hitherto, individual holding is restricted to 5 per cent of the total paid-up capital both on repatriation and non-repatriation basis and aggregate limit cannot exceed 10 percent of the total paid-up capital both on repatriation and non-repatriation basis. However, NRI holding can be allowed up to 24 per cent of the total paid-up capital both on repatriation and non­repatriation basis provided the banking company passes a special resolution to that effect in the General Body.
(c) Applications for foreign direct investment in private banks having joint venture/subsidiary in insurance sector may be addressed to the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) for consideration in consultation with the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) in order to ensure that the 49 per cent limit of foreign shareholding applicable for the insurance sector is not being breached.
(d) Transfer of shares under FDI from residents to non-residents will continue to require approval of RBI and Government as per Regulation 14(5) as applicable
(e) The policies and procedures prescribed from time to time by RBI and other institutions such as SEBI, D/o Company Affairs and IRDA on these matters will continue to apply.
(f) RBI guidelines relating to acquisition by purchase or otherwise of shares of a private bank, if such acquisition results in any person owning or controlling 5 per cent or more of the paid-up capital of the private bank will apply to non-resident investors as well.
(ii) Setting up of a subsidiary by foreign banks
(a) Foreign banks will be permitted to either have branches or subsidiaries but not both.
(b) Foreign banks regulated by banking supervisory authority in the home country and meeting Reserve Bank's licensing criteria will be allowed to hold 100 per cent paid-up capital to enable them to set up a wholly-owned subsidiary in India.
(c) A foreign bank may operate in India through only one of the three channels viz., (i) branches (ii) a wholly-owned subsidiary and (iii) a subsidiary with aggregate foreign investment up to a maximum of 74 per cent in a private bank.
(d) A foreign bank will be permitted to establish a wholly-owned subsidiary either through conversion of existing branches into a subsidiary or through a fresh banking license. A foreign bank will be permitted to establish a subsidiary through acquisition of shares of an existing private sector bank provided at least 26 per cent of the paid-up capital of the private sector bank is held by residents at all times consistent with para (i) (b) above.
(e) A subsidiary of a foreign bank will be subject to the licensing requirements and conditions broadly consistent with those for new private sector banks.
(f) Guidelines for setting up a wholly-owned subsidiary of a foreign bank will be issued separately by RBI.
(g) All applications by a foreign bank for setting up a subsidiary or for conversion of their existing branches to subsidiary in India will have to be made to the RBI.
(iii) At present there is a limit of ten per cent on voting rights in respect of banking companies, and this should be noted by potential investor. Any change in the ceiling can be brought about only after final policy decisions and appropriate Parliamentary approvals.
F.3
Banking - Public Sector
F.3.1
Banking - Public Sector subject to Banking Companies (Acquisition & Transfer of Undertakings) Acts, 1970/80.
This ceiling (20%) is also applicable to the State Bank of India and its associate banks.
20%
Government
F.4
Commodity Exchanges
F.4.1
(i) Futures trading in commodities are regulated under the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952. Commodity Exchanges, like Stock Exchanges, are infrastructure companies in the commodity futures market. With a view to infuse globally acceptable best practices, modern management skills and latest technology, it was decided to allow foreign investment in Commodity Exchanges.
2. For the purposes of this Chapter,
(i) "Commodity Exchange" is a recognized association under the provisions of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, as amended from time to time, to provide exchange platform for trading in forward contracts in commodities.
(ii) "Recognized association" means an association to which recognition for the time being has been granted by the Central Government under section 6 of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952.
(iii) "Association" means any body of individuals, whether incorporated or not, constituted for the purposes of regulating and controlling the business of the sale or purchase of any goods and commodity derivative.
(iv) "Forward contract" means a contract for the delivery of goods and which is not a ready delivery contract.
(v) "Commodity derivative" means-
• a contract for delivery of goods, which is not a ready delivery contract; or
• a contract for differences which derives its value from prices or indices of prices of such underlying goods or activities, services, rights, interests and events, as may be notified in consultation with the Forward Markets Commission by the Central Government, but does not include securities.
F.4.2
Commodity Exchange
49%
Automatic
F.4.3
Other conditions:
(i) FII/FPI purchases shall be restricted to secondary market only.
(ii) No non-resident investor/entity, including persons acting in concert, will hold more than 5% of the equity in these companies.
(iii) Foreign investment in commodity exchanges will be subject to the guidelines of the Central Government / Forward Markets Commission (FMC) from time to time.
F.5
Credit Information Companies (CIC)
F.5.1
Credit Information Companies
74%
Automatic
F.5.2
Other Conditions:
(1) Foreign investment in Credit Information Companies is subject to the Credit Information Companies  (Regulation) Act, 2005.
(2) Foreign investment is permitted subject to regulatory clearance from RBI.
(3) Such FII/FPI investment would be permitted subject to the conditions that:
(a) A single entity should directly or indirectly hold below 10% equity;
(b) Any acquisition in excess of 1 % will have to be reported to RBI as a mandatory requirement; and
(c) FIIs investing in CICs shall not seek a representation on the Board of Directors based upon their shareholding.
F.6
Infrastructure Company in the Securities Market
F.6.1
Infrastructure companies in Securities Markets, namely, stock exchanges, depositories and clearing corporations, in compliance with SEBI Regulations
49%
Automatic
F.6.2
Other Conditions:
F.6.2.1
FII/FPI can invest only through purchases in the secondary market
F.7.
Insurance
F.7.1
Insurance
(i) Insurance Company
(ii) Insurance Brokers
(iii) Third Party Administrators
(iv) Surveyors and Loss Assessors
(v) Other Insurance Intermediaries appointed under the provisions of Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999 (41 of 1999)
49%
Automatic upto 26%,; Government route beyond 26% and upto 49%
F.7.2
Other Conditions:
(a) No Indian insurance company shall allow the aggregate holdings by way of total foreign investment in its equity shares by foreign investors, including portfolio investors, to exceed forty-nine percent of the paid up equity capital of such Indian insurance company.
(b) Foreign direct investment proposals which take the total foreign investment in the Indian insurance company above 26 percent and up to the cap of 49 percent shall be under Government route.
(c) Foreign investment in the sector is subject to compliance of the provisions of the Insurance Act, 1938 and the condition that Companies bringing in FDI shall obtain necessary license from the Insurance Regulatory & Development Authority of India for undertaking insurance activities.
(d) An Indian insurance company shall ensure that its ownership and control remains at all times in the hands of resident Indian entities referred to in Notification No.G.S.R 115 (E), dated 19th February, 2015.
(e) Foreign portfolio investment in an Indian insurance company shall be governed by the provisions contained in sub-regulations (2), (2A), (3) and (8) of regulation 5 of FEMA Regulations, 2000 and provisions of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Foreign Portfolio Investors) Regulations.
(f) Any increase of foreign investment of an Indian insurance company shall be in accordance with the pricing guidelines specified by Reserve Bank of India under the FEMA.
(g) The foreign equity investment cap of 49 percent shall apply on the same terms as above to Insurance Brokers, Third Party Administrators, Surveyors and Loss Assessors and Other Insurance Intermediaries appointed under the provisions of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act,1999 (41 of 1999).
(h) Provided that where an entity like a bank, whose primary business is outside the insurance area, is allowed by the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India to function as an insurance intermediary, the foreign equity investment caps applicable in that sector shall continue to apply, subject to the condition that the revenues of such entities from their primary (i.e. non-insurance related) business must remain above 50 percent of their total revenues in any financial year.
(i) The provisions of paragraphs F.2.2 (3) (i) (c) & (e), relating to ‘Banking-Private Sector’, shall be applicable in respect of bank promoted insurance companies.
(j) Terms ‘Control’, ‘Equity Share Capital’, ‘Foreign Direct Investment’ (FDI), ‘Foreign Investors’, ‘Foreign Portfolio Investment’, ‘Indian Insurance Company’, ‘Indian Company’, ‘Indian Control of an Indian Insurance Company’, ‘Indian Ownership’, ‘Non-resident Entity’, ‘Public Financial Institution’, ‘Resident Indian Citizen’, ‘Total Foreign Investment’ will have the same meaning as provided in Notification No. G.S.R 115 (E), dated 19th February, 2015.
F.8.
Non-Banking Finance Companies (NBFCs)
F.8.1
Foreign investment in NBFC is allowed under the automatic route in only the following activities:
Merchant Banking
Underwriting
Portfolio Management Services
Investment Advisory Services
Financial Consultancy
Stock Broking
Asset Management
Venture Capital
Custodian Services
Factoring
Credit Rating Agencies
Leasing & Finance
Housing Finance
Forex Broking
Credit Card Business
Money Changing Business
Micro Credit
Rural Credit
100%
Automatic
F.8.2
Other Conditions
(1) Investment would be subject to the following minimum capitalisation norms:
(i) US $0.5 million for foreign capital up to 51 % to be brought upfront.
(ii) US $ 5 million for foreign capital more than 51 % and up to 75% to be brought upfront.
(iii) US $ 50 million for foreign capital more than 75% out of which US $ 7.5 million to be brought upfront and the balance in 24 months.
(iv) NBFCs (i) having foreign investment more than 75% and up to 100%, and (ii) with a minimum capitalisation of US$ 50 million, can set up step down subsidiaries for specific NBFC activities, without any restriction on the number of operating subsidiaries and without bringing in additional capital. The minimum capitalization condition as mandated by para 3.10.4.1 of DIPP Circular 1 on Consolidated FDI Policy, therefore, shall not apply to downstream subsidiaries.
(v) Joint Venture operating NBFCs that have 75% or less than 75% foreign investment can also set up subsidiaries for undertaking other NBFC activities, subject to the subsidiaries also complying with the applicable minimum capitalisation norm mentioned in (i), (ii) and (iii) above and (vi) below.
(vi) Non-Fund based activities: US$ 0.5 million to be brought upfront for all permitted non-fund based NBFCs irrespective of the level of foreign investment subject to the following condition:
It would not be permissible for such a company to set up any subsidiary for any other activity, nor it can participate in any equity of an NBFC holding/operating company.
Note
: The following activities would be classified as Non-Fund Based activities:
(a) Investment Advisory Services
(b) Financial Consultancy
(c) Forex Broking
(d) Money Changing Business
(e) Credit Rating Agencies
(vii) This will be subject to compliance with the guidelines of RBI.
Note: (i) Credit Card business includes issuance, sales, marketing & design of various payment products such as credit cards, charge cards, debit cards, stored value cards, smart card, value added cards etc.
(ii) Leasing & Finance covers only financial leases and not operating leases.
FDI in operating leases is permitted up to 100 % on the automatic route.
(2) The NBFC will have to comply with the guidelines of the relevant regulator/s, as applicable.
F.8.3
White Label ATM Operations
100%
Automatic
Other Conditions:
i. Any non-bank entity intending to set up a WLAs should have a minimum net worth of Rs. 100 crore as per the latest financial year’s audited balance sheet, which is to be maintained at all times.
ii. In case the entity is also engaged in any other 18 NBFC activities, then the foreign investment in the company setting up WLA, shall have to comply with the minimum capitalisation norms for foreign investment in NBFC activities, as provided in para F.8.2.
iii. FDI in the WLAO will be subject to the specific criteria and guidelines issued by RBI vide Circular No. DPSS,CO.PD.No.2298/02.10.002/2011-12, as amended from time to time.
F.9
Power Exchanges
F.9.1
Power Exchanges under the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (Power Market) Regulations, 2010
49%
Automatic
F.9.2
Other conditions
(i) FII purchases shall be restricted to secondary market only;
(ii) No non-resident investor/entity, including persons acting in concert, will hold more than 5% of the equity in these companies; and
(iii) The foreign investment would be in compliance with SEBI Regulations; other applicable laws/regulations; security and other conditionalities.
F.10
Pension Sector
49%
Automatic up to 26%; Government route beyond 26% and up to 49 %
16.
Pharmaceuticals
16.1
Greenfield
100%
Automatic
16.2
Brown Field
100%
Government
16.3
Other Conditions
(i) ‘Non-compete’ clause would not be allowed except in special circumstances with the approval of the Foreign Investment Promotion Board.
(ii) The prospective investor and the prospective investee are required to provide a certificate along with the FIPB application.
(iiii) Government may incorporate appropriate conditions for FDI in brownfield cases, at the time of granting approval.
Note :
i. FDI upto 100% under the automatic route is permitted for manufacturing of medical devices. The abovementioned conditions will, therefore, not be applicable to greenfield as well as brownfield projects of this industry.
ii. Medical device means :-
a) Any instrument, apparatus, appliance, implant, material or other article, whether used alone or in combination, including the software, intended by its manufacturer to be used specially for human beings or animals for one or more of the specific purposes of :-
(aa) Diagnosis, prevention, monitoring, treatment or alleviation of any disease or disorder;
(ab) diagnosis, monitoring, treatment, alleviation of, or assistance for, any injury or handicap;
(ac) investigation, replacement or modification or support of the anatomy or of a physiological process;
(ad) supporting or sustaining life;
(ae) disinfection of medical devices;
(af) control of conception;
and which does not achieve its primary intended action in or on the human body or animals by any pharmacological or immunological or metabolic means, but which may be assisted in its intended function by such means;
b) an accessory to such an instrument, apparatus, appliance, material or other article;
c) a device which is reagent, reagent product, calibrator, control material, kit, instrument, apparatus, equipment or system whether used alone or in combination thereof intended to be used for examination and providing information for medical or diagnostic purposes by means of in vitro examination of specimens derived from the human body or animals.
iii. The definition of medical device at Note (ii) above would be subject to the amendment in Drugs and Cosmetics Act.
17
Railway Infrastructure
Construction, operation and maintenance of the following:
(i) Suburban corridor projects through PPP, (ii) speed train projects, (iii) Dedicated freight lines, (iv) Rolling stock including train sets, and locomotives/coaches manufacturing and maintenance facilities, (v) Railway Electrification, (vi) Signaling systems, (vii) Freight terminals, (viii) Passenger terminals, (ix) Infrastructure in industrial park pertaining to railway line/sidings including electrified railway lines and connectivities to main railway line and (x) Mass Rapid Transport Systems.
100%
Automatic
Note:-
(i) Foreign Direct Investment in the abovementioned activities open to private participation including FDI is subject to sectoral guidelines of Ministry of Railways.
(ii) Proposals involving FDI beyond 49% in sensitive areas from security point of view, will be brought by the Ministry of Railways before the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) for consideration on a case to case basis.
3. Saving
Any existing foreign investment already made in accordance with the policy in existence would not require any modifications to confirm to these amendments.
(B. P. Kanungo)
Principal Chief General Manager
Foot Note:-
The Principal Regulations were published in the Official Gazette vide G.S.R. No.406 (E) dated May 8, 2000 in Part II, Section 3, sub-Section (i) and subsequently amended as under:-
G.S.R.No. 158(E) dated 02.03.2001
G.S.R.No. 175(E) dated 13.03.2001
G.S.R.No. 182(E) dated 14.03.2001
G.S.R.No. 4(E) dated 02.01.2002
G.S.R.No. 574(E) dated 19.08.2002
G.S.R.No. 223(E) dated 18.03.2003
G.S.R.No. 225(E) dated 18.03.2003
G.S.R.No. 558(E) dated 22.07.2003
G.S.R.No. 835(E) dated 23.10.2003
G.S.R.No. 899(E) dated 22.11.2003
G.S.R.No. 12(E) dated 07.01.2004
G.S.R.No. 278(E) dated 23.04.2004
G.S.R.No. 454(E) dated 16.07.2004
G.S.R.No. 625(E) dated 21.09.2004
G.S.R.No. 799(E) dated 08.12.2004
G.S.R.No. 201(E) dated 01.04.2005
G.S.R.No. 202(E) dated 01.04.2005
G.S.R.No. 504(E) dated 25.07.2005
G.S.R.No. 505(E) dated 25.07.2005
G.S.R.No. 513(E) dated 29.07.2005
G.S.R.No. 738(E) dated 22.12.2005
G.S.R.No. 29(E) dated 19.01.2006
G.S.R.No. 413(E) dated 11.07.2006
G.S.R.No. 712(E) dated 14.11.2007
G.S.R.No. 713(E) dated 14.11.2007
G.S.R.No. 737(E) dated 29.11.2007
G.S.R.No. 575(E) dated 05.08.2008
G.S.R.No. 896(E) dated 30.12.2008
G.S.R.No. 851(E) dated 01.12.2009
G.S.R.No. 341 (E) dated 21.04.2010
G.S.R.No. 821 (E) dated 10.11.2012
G.S.R.No. 606(E) dated 03.08.2012
G.S.R.No. 795(E) dated 30.10.2012
G.S.R.No. 796(E) dated 30.10.2012
G.S.R. No. 797(E) dated 30.10.2012
G.S.R.No. 945 (E) dated 31.12.2012
G.S.R. No.946(E) dated 31.12.2012
G.S.R. No.38(E) dated 22.01.2013
G.S.R.No.515(E) dated 30.07.2013
G.S.R.No.532(E) dated 05.08.2013
G.S.R. No.341(E) dated 28.05.2013
G.S.R.No.344(E) dated 29.05.2013
G.S.R. No.195(E) dated 01.04.2013
G.S.R.No.393(E) dated 21.06.2013
G.S.R.No.591(E) dated 04.09.2013
G.S.R.No.596(E) dated 06.09.2013
G.S.R.No.597(E) dated 06.09.2013
G.S.R.No.681(E) dated 11.10.2013
G.S.R.No.682(E) dated 11.10.2013
G.S.R. No.818(E) dated 31.12.2013
G.S.R. No.805(E) dated 30.12.2013
G.S.R.No.683(E) dated 11.10.2013
G.S.R.No.189(E) dated 19.03.2014
G.S.R.No.190(E) dated 19.03.2014
G.S.R.No.270(E) dated 07.04.2014
G.S.R.No. 361 (E) dated 27.05.2014
G.S.R.No.370(E) dated 30.05.2014
G.S.R.No.371(E) dated 30.05.2014
G.S.R.No. 435 (E) dated 08.07.2014
G.S.R.No. 400 (E) dated 12.06.2014
G.S.R.No. 436 (E) dated 08.07.2014
G.S.R.No. 487 (E) dated 11.07.2014
G.S.R.No. 632 (E) dated 02.09.2014
G.S.R.No. 798 (E) dated 13.11.2014
G.S.R.No. 799 (E) dated 13.11.2014
G.S.R.No. 800 (E) dated 13.11.2014
G.S.R.No. 829 (E) dated 21.11.2014
G.S.R.No. 906(E) dated 22.12.2014
G.S.R.No. 914 (E) dated 24.12.2014
G.S.R.No. 30 (E) dated 14.01.2015
G.S.R.No. 183 (E) dated 12.03.2015
G.S.R.No. 284 (E) dated 13.04.2015
G.S.R.No. 484 (E) dated 11.06.2015
G.S.R.No. 745 (E) dated 30.09.2015
G.S.R.No. 759 (E) dated 06.10.2015
Published in the Official Gazette of Government of India – Extraordinary – Part-II, Section 3,
Sub-Section (i) dated 30.10.2015- G.S.R.No.823(E)