(70 kb)
Cash Withdrawal for Wedding
RBI/2016-17/145
DCM (Plg) No.1320/10.27.00/2016-17
November 21, 2016
The Chairman / Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer,
Public Sector Banks /Private Sector Banks/ Foreign Banks
Regional Rural Banks / Urban Co-operative Banks / State Co-operative Banks
Dear Sir,
Withdrawal of Legal Tender Character of existing ₹ 500/- and ₹ 1000/- Specified Bank Notes (SBNs) – Cash withdrawal for purpose of celebration of wedding
Please refer to our
Circular No. DCM (Plg) No.1226/10.27.00/2016-17 dated November 08, 2016
on the captioned subject.
2. With a view to enable members of the public to perform and celebrate weddings of their wards it has been decided to allow higher limits of cash withdrawals from their bank deposit accounts to meet wedding related expenses. Yet, banks should encourage families to incur wedding expenses through non-cash means viz. cheques /drafts, credit/debit cards, prepaid cards, mobile transfers, internet banking channels, NEFT/RTGS, etc. Therefore, members of the public should be advised, while granting cash withdrawals, to use cash to meet expenses which have to be met only through cash mode. Cash withdrawals shall be subject to the following conditions:
i. A maximum of ₹ 250000/- is allowed to be withdrawn from the bank deposit accounts till December 30, 2016 out of the balances at credit in the account as at close of business on November 08, 2016.
ii. Withdrawals are permitted only from accounts which are fully KYC compliant.
iii. The amounts can be withdrawn only if the date of marriage is on or before December 30, 2016.
iv. Withdrawals can be made by either of the parents or the person getting married. (Only one of them will be permitted to withdraw).
v. Since the amount proposed to be withdrawn is meant to be used for cash disbursements, it has to be established that the persons for whom the payment is proposed to be made do not have a bank account.
vi. The application for withdrawal shall be accompanied by following documents:
An application as per
Annex
Evidence of the wedding, including the invitation card, copies of receipts for advance payments already made, such as Marriage hall booking, advance payments to caterers, etc.
A detailed list of persons to whom the cash withdrawn is proposed to be paid, together with a declaration from such persons that they do not have a bank account. The list should indicate the purpose for which the proposed payments are being made
3. Banks shall keep a proper record of the evidence and produce them for verification by the authorities in case of need. The scheme will be reviewed based on authenticity/ bona fide use thereof.
Yours faithfully,
(P Vijaya Kumar)
Chief General Manager
Encl: As above