(72 kb)
Revised Prompt Corrective Action (PCA) Framework for Banks
RBI/2016-17/276
DBS.CO.PPD. BC.No.8/11.01.005/2016-17
April 13, 2017
All Scheduled Commercial Banks
(Excluding Regional Rural Banks)
Madam/ Dear Sir
Revised Prompt Corrective Action (PCA) Framework for Banks
Please refer to
RBI circulars No. DBS.CO.PP.BC.9/11.01.005/2002-03 dated December 21, 2002
and
DBS.CO.PP.BC.13/11.01.005/2003-04 dated June 15, 2004
on the scheme of Prompt Corrective Action.
2. The existing PCA framework for banks has since been reviewed and revised. The salient features are provided in the
Annex
.
3. The provisions of the revised PCA framework will be effective from April 1, 2017 based on the financials of the banks for the year ended March 31, 2017. The framework would be reviewed after three years.
4. The PCA framework does not preclude the Reserve Bank of India from taking any other action as it deems fit in addition to the corrective actions prescribed in the framework.
5. The contents of the circular may be brought to the attention of the bank’s Board of Directors.
Yours faithfully
(Parvathy V. Sundaram)
Chief General Manager-in-Charge
Annex
The salient features of revised PCA Framework for Banks
A. Capital, asset quality and profitability continue to be the key areas for monitoring in the revised framework.
B. Indicators to be tracked for Capital, asset quality and profitability would be CRAR/ Common Equity Tier I ratio
1
, Net NPA ratio
2
and Return on Assets
3
respectively.
C. Leverage would be monitored additionally as part of the PCA framework.
D. Breach of any risk threshold (as detailed under) would result in invocation of PCA.
PCA matrix - Areas, indicators and risk thresholds
Indicator
Risk Threshold 1
Risk Threshold 2
Risk Threshold 3
Area
Capital
(Breach of either CRAR or CET 1 ratio to trigger PCA)
CRAR- Minimum regulatory prescription for capital to risk assets ratio + applicable capital conservation buffer(CCB)
current minimum RBI prescription of 10.25% (9% minimum total capital plus 1.25%* of CCB as on March 31, 2017)
And/ Or
Regulatory pre-specified trigger of Common Equity Tier 1 (CET 1min) + applicable capital conservation buffer(CCB)
current minimum RBI prescription of 6.75% (5.5% plus 1.25%* of CCB as on March 31, 2017)
Breach of
either CRAR or CET 1
ratio to trigger PCA
upto 250 bps below Indicator
<10.25% but >=7.75%
upto 162.50 bps below Indicator
<6.75% but >= 5.125%
more than 250 bps but not exceeding 400 bps below Indicator
<7.75% but >=6.25%
more than 162.50 bps below but not exceeding 312.50 bps below Indicator
<5.125% but >=3.625%
-
-
In excess of 312.50 bps below Indicator
<3.625%
Asset Quality
Net Non-performing advances (NNPA) ratio
>=6.0% but <9.0%
>=9.0% but < 12.0%
>=12.0%
Profitability
Return on assets (ROA)
Negative ROA for two consecutive years
Negative ROA for three consecutive years
Negative ROA for four consecutive years
Leverage
Tier 1 Leverage ratio
4
<=4.0% but > = 3.5%
(leverage is over 25 times the Tier 1 capital)
< 3.5% (leverage is over 28.6 times the Tier 1 capital)
*CCB would be 1.875% and 2.5% as on March 31, 2018 and March 31, 2019 respectively.
Breach of ‘Risk Threshold 3’ of CET1 by a bank would identify a bank as a likely candidate for resolution through tools like amalgamation, reconstruction, winding up, etc.
In the case of a default on the part of a bank in meeting the obligations to its depositors, possible resolution processes may be resorted to without reference to the PCA matrix.
E. The PCA framework would apply without exception to all banks operating in India including small banks and foreign banks operating through branches or subsidiaries based on breach of risk thresholds of identified indicators.
F. A bank will be placed under PCA framework based on the audited Annual Financial Results and the Supervisory Assessment made by RBI. However, RBI may impose PCA on any bank during the course of a year (including migration from one threshold to another) in case the circumstances so warrant.
Mandatory and discretionary actions
Specifications
Mandatory actions
Discretionary actions
Risk Threshold 1
Restriction on dividend distribution/remittance of profits.
Promoters/owners/parent in the case of foreign banks to bring in capital
Common menu
Special Supervisory Interactions
Strategy related
Governance related
Capital related
Credit risk related
Market risk related
HR related
Profitability related
Operations related
Any other
Risk Threshold 2
In addition to mandatory actions of Threshold 1,
Restriction on branch expansion; domestic and/or overseas
Higher provisions as part of the coverage regime
Risk Threshold 3
In addition to mandatory actions of Threshold 1,
Restriction on branch expansion; domestic and/or overseas
Restriction on management compensation and directors’ fees, as applicable
Common menu for selection of discretionary corrective actions
1. Special Supervisory interactions
Special Supervisory Monitoring Meetings (SSMMs) at quarterly or other identified frequency
Special inspections/targeted scrutiny of the bank
Special audit of the bank
2. Strategy related actions
RBI to advise the bank’s Board to:
Activate the Recovery Plan that has been duly approved by the supervisor
Undertake a detailed review of business model in terms of sustainability of the business model, profitability of business lines and activities, medium and long term viability, balance sheet projections, etc.
Review short term strategy focusing on addressing immediate concerns
Review medium term business plans, identify achievable targets and set concrete milestones for progress and achievement
Review all business lines to identify scope for enhancement/ contraction
Undertake business process reengineering as appropriate
Undertake restructuring of operations as appropriate
3. Governance related actions
RBI to actively engage with the bank’s Board on various aspects as considered appropriate
RBI to recommend to owners (Government/ promoters/ parent of foreign bank branch) to bring in new management/ Board
RBI to remove managerial persons under Section 36AA of the BR Act 1949 as applicable
RBI to supersede the Board under Section 36ACA of the BR Act 1949/ recommend supersession of the Board as applicable
RBI to require bank to invoke claw back and malus clauses and other actions as available in regulatory guidelines, and impose other restrictions or conditions permissible under the BR Act, 1949
Impose restrictions on directors’ or management compensation, as applicable.
4. Capital related actions
Detailed Board level review of capital planning
Submission of plans and proposals for raising additional capital
Requiring the bank to bolster reserves through retained profits
Restriction on investment in subsidiaries/associates
Restriction in expansion of high risk-weighted assets to conserve capital
Reduction in exposure to high risk sectors to conserve capital
Restrictions on increasing stake in subsidiaries and other group companies
5. Credit risk related actions
Preparation of time bound plan and commitment for reduction of stock of NPAs
Preparation of and commitment to plan for containing generation of fresh NPAs
Strengthening of loan review mechanism
Restrictions on/ reduction in credit expansion for borrowers below certain rating grades
Reduction in risk assets
Restrictions on/ reduction in credit expansion to unrated borrowers
Reduction in unsecured exposures
Reduction in loan concentrations; in identified sectors, industries or borrowers
Sale of assets
Action plan for recovery of assets through identification of areas (geography wise, industry segment wise, borrower wise, etc.) and setting up of dedicated Recovery Task Forces, Adalats, etc.
6. Market risk related actions
Restrictions on/reduction in borrowings from the inter-bank market
Restrictions on accessing/ renewing wholesale deposits/ costly deposits/ certificates of deposits
Restrictions on derivative activities, derivatives that permit collateral substitution
Restriction on excess maintenance of collateral held that could contractually be called any time by the counterparty
7. HR related actions
Restriction on staff expansion
Review of specialized training needs of existing staff
8. Profitability related actions
Restrictions on capital expenditure, other than for technological upgradation within Board approved limits
9. Operations related actions
Restrictions on branch expansion plans; domestic or overseas
Reduction in business at overseas branches/ subsidiaries/ in other entities
Restrictions on entering into new lines of business
Reduction in leverage through reduction in non-fund based business
Reduction in risky assets
Restrictions on non-credit asset creation
Restrictions in undertaking businesses as specified.
Any other specific action that RBI may deem fit considering specific circumstances of a bank.
1
CET 1 ratio – the percentage of core equity capital, net of regulatory adjustments, to total risk weighted assets as defined in RBI Basel III guidelines
2
NNPA ratio – the percentage of net NPAs to net advances
3
ROA – the percentage of profit after tax to average total assets
4
Tier 1 Leverage ratio – the percentage of the capital measure to the exposure measure as defined in RBI guidelines on leverage ratio.