(31 kb)
Exim Bank's Government of India supported Line of Credit of USD 318 million to the Government of Sri Lanka
RBI/2017-18/77
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 09
October 12, 2017
To
All Category - I Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam / Sir,
Exim Bank's Government of India supported Line of Credit of USD 318 million to the Government of Sri Lanka
Export-Import Bank of India (Exim Bank) has entered into an Agreement on June 06, 2017 with the Government of Sri Lanka for making available to the latter, a Government of India supported Line of Credit (LoC) of USD 318 million (USD Three hundred and eighteen million only) for the purpose of financing (i) Procurement of rolling Stock for Sri Lanka Railway USD 177 million (USD One hundred seventy seven million only) (ii) Upgrading railway track from Moho-Anuradhapura-Omanthai or any other sector USD 136 million (USD One hundred thirty six million only) and (iii) Utilization of the balance amount in Sri Lanka as may be agreed between the borrower and Government of India. The credit is available for financing export of eligible goods and services from India for the purpose of financing rolling stock and upgrading railway track in terms of the Agreement and those which are eligible for export under the Foreign Trade Policy of the Government of India and whose purchase may be agreed to be financed by the Exim Bank under this agreement. The goods include plant, machinery and equipment and services include consultancy services. Out of the total credit by Exim Bank under this agreement, goods and services of the value of at least 75 per cent of the contract price shall be supplied by the seller from India and the remaining 25 per cent of goods and services may be procured by the seller for the purpose of the eligible contract from outside India.
2. The Agreement under the LoC is effective from August 22, 2017. Under the LoC, the terminal utilization period is 60 months after the scheduled completion date of the project.
3. Shipments under the LoC will have to be declared on Export Declaration Form as per instructions issued by the Reserve Bank from time to time.
4. No agency commission is payable for export under the above LoC. However, if required, the exporter may use its own resources or utilize balances in its Exchange Earners’ Foreign Currency Account for payment of commission in free foreign exchange. Authorised Dealer Category- I (AD Category- I) banks may allow such remittance after realization of full eligible value of export subject to compliance with the extant instructions for payment of agency commission.
5. AD Category- I banks may bring the contents of this circular to the notice of their exporter constituents and advise them to obtain full details of the LoC from the Exim Bank’s office at Centre One, Floor 21, World Trade Centre Complex, Cuffe Parade, Mumbai 400 005 or from their website
www.eximbankindia.in
6. The directions contained in this circular have been issued under section 10(4) and 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA), 1999 (42 of 1999) and are without prejudice to permissions / approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(J K Pandey)
Chief General Manager