(43 kb)
Exim Bank's Government of India supported Line of Credit of USD 71.40 million to the Government of Côte d’Ivoire
RBI/2017-18/125
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.17
January 25, 2018
All Category – I Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam/Sir
Exim Bank's Government of India supported Line of Credit of USD 71.40 million to the Government of Côte d’Ivoire
Export-Import Bank of India (Exim Bank) has entered into an Agreement on May 22, 2017 with the Government of Côte d'Ivoire for making available to the latter, a Government of India supported Line of Credit (LoC) of USD 71.4 million (USD Seventy one million four hundred thousand only) for the purpose of financing the Upgradation of four Military Hospitals in Abidjan Korhogo, Bouake and Daloa regions’ in Côte d’Ivoire. Under the arrangement, financing export of eligible goods and services from India would be allowed which are eligible for export under the Foreign Trade Policy of the Government of India and whose purchase may be agreed to be financed by the Exim Bank under this agreement. The goods include plant, machinery and equipment and services include consultancy services. Out of the total credit by Exim Bank under this agreement, goods and services of the value of at least 75 per cent of the contract price shall be supplied by the seller from India and the remaining 25 per cent of goods and services may be procured by the seller for the purpose of the eligible contract from outside India.
2. The Agreement under the LoC is effective from December 15, 2017. Under the LoC, the terminal utilization period is 60 months after the scheduled completion date of the project.
3. Shipments under the LoC will have to be declared on Export Declaration Form as per instructions issued by Reserve Bank from time to time.
4. No agency commission is payable for export under the above LoC. However, if required, the exporter may use its own resources or utilize balances in its Exchange Earners’ Foreign Currency Account for payment of commission in free foreign exchange. Authorised Dealer Category- I (AD Category- I) banks may allow such remittance after realization of full eligible value of export subject to compliance with the extant instructions for payment of agency commission.
5. AD Category – I banks may bring the contents of this circular to the notice of their exporter constituents and advise them to obtain full details of the LoC from the Exim Bank’s office at Centre One, Floor 21, World Trade Centre Complex, Cuffe Parade, Mumbai 400 005 or from their website
www.eximbankindia.in
6. The directions contained in this circular have been issued under section 10(4) and 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA), 1999 (42 of 1999) and are without prejudice to permissions/ approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours faithfully
J K Pandey
Chief General Manager