(78 kb)
Exim Bank's Government of India supported Line of Credit of USD 4.50 billion to the Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
RBI/2017-18/149
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.21
April 5, 2018
All Category – I Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam/Sir
Exim Bank's Government of India supported Line of Credit of USD 4.50 billion to the Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Export-Import Bank of India (Exim Bank) has entered into an agreement dated October 04, 2017 with the Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh (the borrower) for making available to the latter, a Government of India supported Line of Credit (LOC) of USD 4.50 billion (USD Four Billion and Five Hundred Million only) for financing various social and infrastructure developmental projects in the borrower’s country and consultancy services to be exported from India to the borrower’s country. Under the arrangement, financing export of eligible goods and services from India would be allowed which are eligible for export under the Foreign Trade Policy of the Government of India and whose purchase may be agreed to be financed by the Exim Bank under this agreement. The goods include plant, machinery and equipment and services include consultancy services. Out of the total credit by Exim Bank under this agreement, goods and services of the value of at least 75 per cent of the contract price shall be supplied by the seller from India and the remaining 25 per cent of goods and services may be procured by the seller for the purpose of the eligible contract from outside India; Provided that in case of projects involving civil construction, the eligible goods upto the contract price to be supplied by the seller from Indian may be further reduced from 75 percent to 65 percent and further reduction can be considered on a case to case basis by EXIM Bank, provided the sourcing is not from a third country.
2. The Agreement under the LoC is effective from February 26, 2018. Under the LoC, the terminal utilization period is 60 months after the scheduled completion date of the respective project.
3. Shipments under the LoC will have to be declared on Export Declaration Form as per instructions issued by Reserve Bank from time to time.
4. No agency commission is payable for export under the above LoC. However, if required, the exporter may use its own resources or utilize balances in its Exchange Earners’ Foreign Currency Account for payment of commission in free foreign exchange. Authorised Dealer Category- I (AD Category- I) banks may allow such remittance after realization of full eligible value of export subject to compliance with the extant instructions for payment of agency commission.
5. AD Category – I banks may bring the contents of this circular to the notice of their exporter constituents and advise them to obtain full details of the LoC from the Exim Bank’s office at Centre One, Floor 21, World Trade Centre Complex, Cuffe Parade, Mumbai 400 005 or from their website
www.eximbankindia.in
6. The directions contained in this circular have been issued under section 10(4) and 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA), 1999 (42 of 1999) and are without prejudice to permissions/ approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours faithfully
R K Moolchandani
Chief General Manager