(174 kb)
Action Points for Lead Banks on Enhancing the Effectiveness of Lead District Managers (LDMs)
RBI/2017-2018/156
FIDD.CO.LBS.BC.No.20/02.01.001/2017-18
April 6, 2018
The Chairmen/Managing Directors/Chief Executive Officers
All Lead Banks
Madam/ Dear Sir,
Action Points for Lead Banks on Enhancing the Effectiveness of Lead District Managers (LDMs)
As you are aware, the Lead Bank Scheme was last reviewed by the “High Level Committee” under Smt Usha Thorat, then Deputy Governor of Reserve Bank of India, as the Chairperson in 2009. In view of changes that have taken place in the financial sector over the years, Reserve Bank of India had constituted a “Committee of Executive Directors” of the Bank to study the efficacy of the Scheme and suggest measures for improvement. The Committee’s recommendations were discussed with various stakeholders and based on their feedback, it has been decided that the following ‘action points’ will be implemented by the Lead Banks.
In view of the critical role played by LDMs, it may be ensured that officials posted as LDMs possess requisite leadership skills.
Apart from the provision of a separate office space, technical infrastructure like computers, printer, data connectivity, etc. which are basic necessities for LDMs to discharge their core responsibilities may be provided to LDMs’ Office without exception.
It is suggested that a dedicated vehicle may be provided to LDMs’ to facilitate closer liaison with the bank officials, district administration officials as also to organise/ attend various financial literacy initiatives and meetings.
The absence of a specialist officer/assistant for data entry/analysis is a common and major issue faced by LDMs. Liberty to hire the services of skilled computer operator may be given to the LDMs to overcome the shortage of staff/ in case appropriate staff is not posted at LDM office.
2. You are advised to take appropriate action as required. Further, for successful functioning of the Lead Bank Scheme, we expect Lead Banks to go the extra mile to provide facilities over and above the bare minimum to these critical field functionaries.
Yours faithfully,
(Gautam Prasad Borah)
Chief General Manager-in-Charge