(327 kb)
Amendment to Master Direction (MD) on KYC – Centralized KYC Registry – Roll out of Legal Entity Template & other changes
RBI/2020-21/80
DOR.AML.BC.No.31/14.01.001/2020-21
December 18, 2020
The Chairpersons/ CEOs of all the Regulated Entities
Dear Sir/Madam,
Amendment to Master Direction (MD) on KYC – Centralized KYC Registry – Roll out of Legal Entity Template & other changes
Regulated Entities (REs) have been uploading the KYC data pertaining to all individual accounts opened on or after January 1, 2017 on to CKYCR in terms of the provisions of the Prevention of Money Laundering (Maintenance of Records) Rules, 2005. Changes to the template, as and when required are released by CERSAI after consulting the Reserve Bank.
2. As the CKYCR is now fully operational for individual customers, it has been decided to extend the CKYCR to Legal Entities (LEs). Accordingly, REs shall upload the KYC data pertaining to accounts of LEs opened on or after April 1, 2021, on to CKYCR in terms of Rule 9 (1A) of the PML Rules. The LE Template and the Annex thereof are attached as
Annex “A”
and
Annex “B”
respectively to this circular. The LE Template would be released by CERSAI well in advance so that REs start using it from the notified date. REs shall also ensure that in case of accounts of LEs opened prior to April 1, 2021, the KYC records are uploaded on to CKYCR during the process of periodic updation as specified in Section 38 of the Master Direction, or earlier when the updated KYC information is obtained/received from the customer in certain cases. REs shall ensure that during periodic updation, the customers’ KYC details are migrated to current Customer Due Diligence (CDD) standards.
3. In order to ensure that all existing KYC records of individual customers are incrementally uploaded on to CKYCR, REs shall upload the KYC data pertaining to accounts of individuals opened prior to January 01, 2017, at the time of periodic updation as specified in Section 38 of the Master Direction, or earlier when the updated KYC information is obtained/received from the customer in certain cases. REs shall ensure that during periodic updation, the customers’ KYC details are migrated to current CDD standard.
4. Where a customer, for the purpose of establishing an account based relationship, submits a KYC Identifier to a RE, with an explicit consent to download records from CKYCR, then such RE shall retrieve the KYC records online from CKYCR using the KYC Identifier and the customer shall not be required to submit the same KYC records or information or any other additional identification documents or details, unless –
there is a change in the information of the customer as existing in the records of CKYCR;
the current address of the customer is required to be verified;
the RE considers it necessary in order to verify the identity or address of the customer, or to perform enhanced due diligence or to build an appropriate risk profile of the client.
5. Once KYC Identifier is generated by CKYCR, the REs shall ensure that the same is communicated to the individual/legal entity as the case may be.
6. The
Master Direction on KYC dated February 25, 2016
, is hereby updated to reflect the changes effected by the above amendment and shall come into force with immediate effect.
Yours faithfully,
(Thomas Mathew)
Chief General Manager
Encl: As above