(307 kb)
Priority Sector Lending (PSL) – Increase in limits for bank lending against Negotiable Warehouse Receipts (NWRs) / electronic Negotiable Warehouse Receipts (eNWRs)
RBI/2021-22/14
FIDD.CO.Plan.BC.No.7/04.09.01/2021-22
April 7, 2021
The Chairman / Managing Director/
Chief Executive Officer
[All Commercial Banks including Regional Rural Banks,
Small Finance Banks, Local Area Banks and
Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks other than Salary Earners’ Banks]
Dear Sir/Madam
Priority Sector Lending (PSL) – Increase in limits for bank lending against Negotiable Warehouse Receipts (NWRs) / electronic Negotiable Warehouse Receipts (eNWRs)
Please refer to the
Statement on Developmental and Regulatory Policies dated April 7, 2021
, wherein Reserve Bank of India (RBI) had announced increase in loan limits for bank lending against NWRs/eNWRs.
2. In terms of paras 8.1 (vii) and 8.2 (b) of the “
Master Direction on Priority Sector Lending – Targets and Classification” dated September 4, 2020
, bank loans against pledge/ hypothecation of agricultural produce (including warehouse receipts) for a period not exceeding 12 months are eligible for classification under PSL, subject to a limit up to ₹50 lakh per borrower.
3. With a view to ensure greater flow of credit to the farmers against pledge/hypothecation of agricultural produce, and to encourage use of NWR/eNWR issued by regulated warehouses as a preferred instrument for availing such finance by the farmers, it has been decided to enhance the PSL limit for loans against NWRs/eNWRs from ₹50 lakh to ₹75 lakh per borrower. The PSL limit backed by the warehouse receipts other than NWR/eNWR will continue to be ₹50 lakh per borrower.
4. Consequent to the above change, para 8.1(vii) and 8.2(b) of the
Master Direction on Priority Sector Lending – Targets and Classification dated September 4, 2020
will stand modified as follows:
Para 8.1 - Farm Credit - Individual farmers
vii.
Loans against pledge/hypothecation of agricultural produce (including warehouse receipts) for a period not exceeding 12 months subject to a limit up to ₹75 lakh against NWRs/eNWRs and up to ₹50 lakh against warehouse receipts other than NWRs/eNWRs.
Para 8.2 Farm Credit - Corporate farmers, Farmer Producer Organisations (FPOs)/(FPC) Companies of Individual Farmers, Partnership firms and Co-operatives of farmers engaged in Agriculture and Allied Activities
(b)
Loans up to ₹75 lakh against pledge/hypothecation of agricultural produce (including warehouse receipts) for a period not exceeding 12 months against NWRs/eNWRs and up to ₹50 lakh against warehouse receipts other than NWRs/eNWRs.
Yours faithfully
(Sonali Sen Gupta)
Chief General Manager-in-Charge