(321 kb)
Prompt Corrective Action (PCA) Framework for Scheduled Commercial Banks
RBI/2021-22/118
DOS.CO.PPG.SEC.No.4/11.01.005/2021-22
November 02, 2021
All Scheduled Commercial Banks
(Excluding Small Finance Banks, Payment Banks and Regional Rural Banks)
Madam/ Dear Sir,
Prompt Corrective Action (PCA) Framework for Scheduled Commercial Banks
Please refer to the
circular No. DBS.CO.PPD.BC.No.8/11.01.005/2016-17 dated April 13, 2017
on the Revised Prompt Corrective Action (PCA) Framework for Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs).
2. The existing PCA Framework for SCBs has since been reviewed and revised. The revised Framework is provided in the
Annex
.
3. The provisions of the revised PCA Framework will be effective from January 1, 2022.
4. The objective of the PCA Framework is to enable Supervisory intervention at appropriate time and require the Supervised Entity to initiate and implement remedial measures in a timely manner, so as to restore its financial health. The PCA Framework is also intended to act as a tool for effective market discipline. The PCA Framework does not preclude the Reserve Bank of India from taking any other action as it deems fit at any time, in addition to the corrective actions prescribed in the Framework.
5. The contents of the circular may be brought to the attention of the bank’s Board of Directors.
Yours faithfully
(Ajay Kumar Choudhary)
Chief General Manager In-Charge
Enclosure: PCA Framework for Scheduled Commercial Banks
Annex
PCA Framework for Scheduled Commercial Banks
1
A. Capital, Asset Quality and Leverage will be the key areas for monitoring in the revised framework.
B. Indicators to be tracked for Capital, Asset Quality and Leverage would be CRAR/ Common Equity Tier I Ratio
2
, Net NPA Ratio
3
and Tier I Leverage Ratio
4
respectively.
C. Breach of any risk threshold (as detailed under) may result in invocation of PCA.
PCA matrix – Parameters, indicators and risk thresholds
Parameter
Indicator
Risk Threshold 1
Risk Threshold 2
Risk Threshold 3
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Capital
(Breach of either CRAR or CET 1 ratio)
CRAR - Minimum regulatory prescription for Capital to Risk Assets Ratio + applicable Capital Conservation Buffer (CCB)
and/or
Regulatory Pre-Specified Trigger of Common Equity Tier 1 Ratio (CET 1 PST) + applicable Capital Conservation Buffer (CCB)
Upto 250 bps below the Indicator prescribed at column (2)
Upto 162.50 bps below the Indicator prescribed at column (2)
More than 250 bps but not exceeding 400 bps below the Indicator prescribed at column (2)
More than 162.50 bps below but not exceeding 312.50 bps below the Indicator prescribed at column (2)
In excess of 400 bps below the Indicator prescribed at column (2)
In excess of 312.50 bps below the Indicator prescribed at column (2)
Breach of either CRAR or CET 1 ratio to trigger PCA
Asset Quality
Net Non-Performing Advances (NNPA) ratio
>=6.0% but <9.0%
>=9.0% but < 12.0%
>=12.0%
Leverage
Regulatory minimum Tier 1 Leverage Ratio
Upto 50 bps below the regulatory minimum
More than 50 bps but not exceeding 100 bps below the regulatory minimum
More than 100 bps below the regulatory minimum
D. The PCA Framework would apply to all banks operating in India including foreign banks operating through branches or subsidiaries based on breach of risk thresholds of identified indicators.
E. A bank will generally be placed under PCA Framework based on the Audited Annual Financial Results and the ongoing Supervisory Assessment made by RBI. RBI may impose PCA on any bank during the course of a year (including migration from one threshold to another) in case the circumstances so warrant.
F. Exit from PCA and Withdrawal of Restrictions under PCA - Once a bank is placed under PCA, taking the bank out of PCA Framework and/or withdrawal of restrictions imposed under the PCA Framework will be considered: a) if no breaches in risk thresholds in any of the parameters are observed as per four continuous quarterly financial statements, one of which should be Audited Annual Financial Statement (subject to assessment by RBI); and b) based on Supervisory comfort of the RBI, including an assessment on sustainability of profitability of the bank.
G. When a bank is placed under PCA, one or more of the following corrective actions may be prescribed:
Mandatory and Discretionary actions
Specifications
Mandatory actions
Discretionary actions
Risk Threshold 1
Restriction on dividend distribution/remittance of profits.
Promoters/Owners/Parent (in the case of foreign banks) to bring in capital
Common menu
Special Supervisory Actions
Strategy related
Governance related
Capital related
Credit risk related
Market risk related
HR related
Profitability related
Operations/Business related
Any other
Risk Threshold 2
In addition to mandatory actions of Threshold 1,
Restriction on branch expansion; domestic and/or overseas
Risk Threshold 3
In addition to mandatory actions of Threshold 1 & 2,
Appropriate restrictions on capital expenditure, other than for technological upgradation within Board approved limits
Common menu for selection of Discretionary Corrective Actions
1. Special Supervisory Actions
Special Supervisory Monitoring Meetings (SSMMs) at quarterly or other identified frequency
Special inspections/targeted scrutiny of the bank
Cause a special audit of the bank by the extant Supervisory mechanism and/or through external auditors
Resolution of the bank by Amalgamation or Reconstruction (Ref. Section 45 of Banking Regulation Act 1949)
2. Strategy related Actions
RBI to advise the bank’s Board to:
Activate the Recovery Plan that has been duly approved by the Supervisor
Undertake a detailed review of business model in terms of sustainability of the business model, profitability of business lines and activities, medium and long-term viability, etc.
Review short term strategy focusing on addressing immediate concerns
Review medium term business plans, identify achievable targets and set concrete milestones for progress and achievement
Undertake business process reengineering as appropriate
Undertake restructuring of operations as appropriate
3. Governance related Actions
RBI to actively engage with the bank’s Board on various aspects as considered appropriate
RBI to recommend to Owners (Government/ Promoters/ Parent of foreign bank branch) to bring in new Management/ Board
RBI to remove managerial persons under Section 36AA of the BR Act, 1949 as applicable
RBI to supersede the Board under Section 36ACA of the BR Act, 1949/ recommend supersession of the Board as applicable
RBI to require bank to invoke claw back and malus clauses and other actions as available in regulatory guidelines, and impose other restrictions or conditions permissible under the BR Act, 1949
Impose restrictions on directors’ or management compensation, as applicable.
4. Capital related Actions
Detailed Board level review of capital planning
Submission of plans and proposals for raising additional capital
Requiring the bank to bolster reserves through retained profits
Restriction on investment in subsidiaries/associates
Restriction in expansion of high risk-weighted assets to conserve capital
Reduction in exposure to high risk sectors to conserve capital
Restrictions on increasing stake in subsidiaries and other group companies
5. Credit Risk related Actions
Preparation of time bound plan and commitment for reduction of stock of NPAs
Preparation of and commitment to plan for containing generation of fresh NPAs
Higher provisions for NPAs/NPIs and as part of the coverage regime
Strengthening of loan review mechanism
Restrictions/reduction in total credit risk weight density (example: restriction/reduction in credit for borrowers below certain rating grades, restriction/reduction in unsecured exposures, etc.)
Reduction in loan concentrations; in identified sectors, industries or borrowers
Sale of assets
Action plan for recovery of assets through identification of areas (geography wise, industry segment-wise, borrower-wise, etc.) and setting up of dedicated Recovery Task Forces, Adalats, etc.
Prohibition on expansion of credit/ investment portfolios other than investment in government securities / other High-Quality Liquid Investments
6. Market Risk related Actions
Restrictions on/reduction in borrowings from the inter-bank market
Restrictions on accessing/ renewing wholesale deposits/ costly deposits/ certificates of deposits
Restrictions on derivative activities, derivatives that permit collateral substitution
Restriction on excess maintenance of collateral held that could contractually be called any time by the counterparty
7. HR related Actions
Restriction on staff expansion
Review of specialized training needs of existing staff
8. Profitability related Actions
Restrictions on capital expenditure, other than for technological upgradation within Board approved limits
Restrictions/reduction in variable operating costs
9. Operations related Actions
Restrictions on branch expansion plans; domestic or overseas
Reduction in business at overseas branches/ subsidiaries/ in other entities
Restrictions on entering into new lines of business
Reduction in leverage through reduction in non-fund based business
Reduction in risky assets
Restrictions on non-credit asset creation
Restrictions on undertaking businesses as specified.
Restriction/reduction of outsourcing activities
Restrictions on new borrowings
10. Other Actions
Any other specific action that RBI may deem fit considering specific circumstances of a bank.
1
In this circular ‘banks’ mean all Scheduled Commercial Banks (excluding Small Finance Banks, Payment Banks and Regional Rural Banks)
2
CET 1 ratio – the percentage of common equity capital, net of regulatory adjustments, to total risk weighted assets as defined in RBI Basel III guidelines
3
NNPA ratio – the percentage of net NPAs to net advances
4
Tier 1 Leverage ratio – the percentage of the capital measure to the exposure measure as defined in RBI guidelines on Leverage ratio