(392 kb)
Reserve Bank of India (Financial Statements - Presentation and Disclosures) Directions, 2021 - Disclosure of material items
RBI/2022-23/155
DOR.ACC.REC.No.91/21.04.018/2022-23
December 13, 2022
Madam/Sir,
Reserve Bank of India (Financial Statements - Presentation and Disclosures) Directions, 2021 - Disclosure of material items
Please refer to the notes and instructions for compilation of Balance Sheet and Profit and Loss Account, for commercial banks, as specified in Annexure II to the
Reserve Bank of India (Financial Statements-Presentation and Disclosures) Directions, 2021
(hereinafter referred to as “Directions”).
2. In terms of Part A of Annexure II to the Directions, in case any item under the subhead “Miscellaneous Income” under the head “Schedule 14-Other Income” exceeds one per cent of total income, particulars shall be given in the notes to accounts. Similar instructions exist in case of subhead “Other expenditure” under the head “Schedule 16-Operating Expenses”.
3. In order to ensure greater transparency, it has been decided that banks shall also disclose the particulars of all such items in the notes to accounts wherever any item under the Schedule 5(IV)-Other Liabilities and Provisions-“Others (including provisions)” or Schedule 11(VI)-Other Assets-“Others” exceeds one per cent of the total assets.
4. Further, Payments Banks shall also disclose particulars of all such items in the notes to accounts, wherever any item under the Schedule 14(I)-Other Income-“Commission, Exchange and Brokerage” exceeds one per cent of the total income.
5. We also invite attention to Clause 6 of the Chapter IV of the Directions ibid, in terms of which more comprehensive disclosures than the minimum required are encouraged, especially if such disclosures significantly aid in the understanding of the financial position and performance of banks.
Applicability
6. These instructions are applicable to all commercial banks. These instructions shall come into effect for disclosures in the notes to the annual financial statements for the year ending March 31, 2023 and onwards.
7. The
Reserve Bank of India (Financial Statements - Presentation and Disclosures) Directions, 2021
shall stand updated to reflect these changes.
Yours faithfully,
(Usha Janakiraman)
Chief General Manager