(277 kb)
Agency Commission for collection of indirect taxes through ICEGATE payment gateway
RBI/2023-24/43
CO.DGBA.GBD.No.S295/31-12-010/2023-2024
June 14, 2023
All Agency banks
Madam / Dear Sir
Agency Commission for collection of indirect taxes through ICEGATE payment gateway
Please refer to Para 21 of our
Master Circular on Conduct of Government Business by Agency Banks - Payment of Agency Commission dated April 1, 2023
related to claiming of agency commission.
2. Since certain transactions related to collection of indirect taxes through ICEGATE (CEP) payment gateway are now being reported by agency banks to Mumbai Regional Office (MRO), RBI with effect from April 01, 2023, it has been decided to modify paragraph 21 of the aforesaid Master Circular. The modified paragraph 21 will read as follows:
“Agency banks are required to submit their claims for agency commission in the prescribed format to CAS Nagpur in respect of Central government transactions and the respective Regional Office of Reserve Bank of India for State government transactions. However, agency commission claims pertaining to GST receipt transactions, transactions  related to direct tax collection under TIN 2.0 regime,
and transactions pertaining to collection of indirect taxes through ICEGATE payment gateway reported to Mumbai Regional Office, RBI
will be settled at Mumbai Regional Office of Reserve Bank of India only and accordingly all agency banks, authorized to collect GST, direct tax collection under TIN 2.0
and indirect taxes through ICEGATE payment gateway
, are advised to submit their agency commission claims pertaining to the respective receipt transactions at Mumbai Regional Office only.
The agency commission claim for Central Government transactions reported to CAS, Nagpur, RBI
will be continued to be settled at CAS, Nagpur, RBI. The formats for claiming agency commission for all agency banks and separate and distinctive set of certificates to be signed by the branch officials and Chartered Accountants or Cost Accountants are given in Annex 2, Annex 2A and Annex 2B respectively. These certificates would be in addition to the usual Certificate from ED / CGM (in charge of government business) to the effect that there are no pension arrears to be credited / delays in crediting regular pension / arrears thereof.”
3. All other instructions of the said Master Circular remain unchanged.
Yours faithfully
(Indranil Chakraborty)
Chief General Manager