(273 kb)
CIMS Project implementation - Discontinuation of submission in legacy XBRL
RBI/2023-24/94
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.12
December 22, 2023
To
All Category-I Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam / Sir,
CIMS Project implementation - Discontinuation of submission in legacy XBRL
Attention of Authorised Dealer Category-I (AD Category- I) banks is invited to
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 103 dated April 03, 2012
and of
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 30 dated September 15, 2014
in terms of which, AD Category-I banks were required to submit the following statements on XBRL site –
(i) Statement on
half yearly
basis (end March/end September) showing the quantity and value of gold imported by the nominated banks/ agencies/ EOUs/ SEZs in Gem & Jewellery sector, mode of payment-wise,
(ii) Statement on
monthly basis
showing the quantity and value of gold imports by the nominated agencies (other than the nominated banks)/ EOUs/ SEZs in Gem & Jewellery sector during the month under report as well as the cumulative position as at the end of the said month beginning from the 1st month of the Financial Year.
2. It has now been decided to discontinue submission of the return through the XBRL system and shift to Centralised Information Management System (CIMS), Bank’s new data warehouse for data collection, with effect from
December 26, 2023
. AD Category-I banks have already been onboarded on CIMS portal and are currently undertaking parallel submission of the return on both XBRL site as well as CIMS portal. The returns have been named ‘Import of gold by EOUs, units in SEZ/EPZ and nominated agencies(M)’, ‘‘Import of gold by EOUs, units in SEZ/EPZ and nominated agencies(HY)’ and has been assigned return codes- ‘R132’ & ‘R133’ respectively on CIMS portal.
3. Accordingly, AD Category-I banks shall upload the two statements as mentioned at para 1 (i) and (ii) on CIMS portal (URL:
https://sankalan.rbi.org.in
) with effect from December 26, 2023. In case no data is to be furnished, AD Category-I banks shall upload a ‘NIL’ report.
4. The directions contained in this circular have been issued under Section 10 (4) and 11 (1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and are without prejudice to permissions/approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(Puneet Pancholy)
Chief General Manager