(205 kb)
Basel III Framework on Liquidity Standards – Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) – Review of National Development Banks
RBI/2023-24/103
DOR.LRG.REC.62/03.10.001/2023-24
December 29, 2023
Madam / Dear Sir,
Basel III Framework on Liquidity Standards – Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) – Review of National Development Banks
Please refer to circular
DBR.BP.BC.No.106/21.04.098/2017-18 dated May 17, 2018
on Basel III Framework on Liquidity Standards - Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) – Final Guidelines.
2. NABARD, NHB and SIDBI are considered as National Development Banks (NDBs) under the extant NSFR framework. On a review, it has been decided that the other All India Financial Institutions (AIFIs) i.e. EXIM Bank and National Bank for Financing Infrastructure and Development (NaBFID) shall also be considered as NDBs for NSFR computation.
3. Further, unencumbered loans to NDBs with a residual maturity of one year or more that would qualify for a 35 per cent or lower risk weight under the Standardised Approach for credit risk
1
shall be assigned a Required Stable Funding (RSF) factor of 65 per cent (as against 100 per cent currently).
4. Accordingly, the select instructions have been amended as detailed in
Annex
.
Applicability
5. This circular is applicable to all Scheduled Commercial Banks (excluding Payments Banks and Regional Rural Banks).
6. These instructions shall come into force with immediate effect.
Yours faithfully
(R. Lakshmi Kanth Rao)
Chief General Manager-in-Charge
Annex
Circular DBR.BP.BC.No.106/21.04.098/2017-18 dated May 17, 2018
on Basel III Framework on Liquidity Standards - Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) – Final Guidelines
Sr. No.
Reference Paragraph
Existing text
Amended text (in track-change mode)
1
7.5 (c)
funding with residual maturity of less than one year from sovereigns, public sector entities (PSEs), and multilateral and national development banks (NABARD, NHB & SIDBI); and
funding with residual maturity of less than one year from sovereigns, public sector entities (PSEs), and multilateral and national development banks (
EXIM Bank,
NABARD,
NaBFID
, NHB and SIDBI); and
2
9.6 (e)
all other non-HQLA not included in the above categories that have a residual maturity of less than one year, including loans to non-financial corporate clients, loans to retail customers (i.e. natural persons) and small business customers, and loans to sovereigns, PSEs and national development banks (NABARD, NHB & SIDBI).
all other non-HQLA not included in the above categories that have a residual maturity of less than one year, including loans to non-financial corporate clients, loans to retail customers (i.e. natural persons) and small business customers, and loans to sovereigns, PSEs and national development banks (
EXIM Bank,
NABARD,
NaBFID
, NHB and SIDBI).
3
9.7 (b)
other unencumbered loans not included in the above categories (including loans to sovereigns and PSEs with a residual maturity of one year or more), excluding loans to financial institutions, with a residual maturity of one year or more that would qualify for a 35% or lower risk weight under the Basel II Standardised Approach for credit risk.
other unencumbered loans not included in the above categories (including loans to sovereigns
,
and
PSEs
and national development banks {EXIM Bank, NABARD, NaBFID, NHB and SIDBI}
with a residual maturity of one year or more), excluding loans to financial institutions, with a residual maturity of one year or more that would qualify for a 35% or lower risk weight under the
Basel II
Standardised Approach for credit risk
.
, as per the
Master Circular on Basel III Capital Regulations dated May 12, 2023
as amended from time to time.
1
Standardised Approach for Credit Risk as per the
Master Circular on Basel III Capital Regulations dated May 12, 2023
as amended from time to time