(294 kb)
Key Facts Statement (KFS) for Loans & Advances
RBI/2024-25/18
DOR.STR.REC.13/13.03.00/2024-25
April 15, 2024
All Commercial Banks (including Small Finance Banks, Local Area Banks and Regional Rural Banks, excluding Payments Banks)
All Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks, State Co-operative Banks and Central Co-operative Banks
All Non-Banking Financial Companies (including Housing Finance Companies)
Key Facts Statement (KFS) for Loans & Advances
Please refer to our instructions on Key Facts Statement (KFS) and disclosure of Annual Percentage Rate (APR) as contained in paragraph 2 of
Circular on ‘Display of information by banks’ dated January 22, 2015
; paragraph 6 of
Master Direction on ‘Regulatory Framework for Microfinance Loans’ dated March 14, 2022
; and paragraph 5 of ‘
Guidelines on Digital Lending’ dated September 2, 2022
.
2. As announced in the
Statement on Developmental and Regulatory Policies dated February 8, 2024
, it has been decided to harmonize the instructions on the subject. This is being done in order to enhance transparency and reduce information asymmetry on financial products being offered by different regulated entities, thereby empowering borrowers for making an informed financial decision. The harmonised instructions shall be applicable in cases of all retail and MSME term loan products extended by all regulated entities (REs).
3. For the purpose of this circular, following terms have been defined:
(a) Key Facts
of a loan agreement between an RE/a group of REs and a borrower are legally significant and deterministic facts that satisfy basic information required to assist the borrower in taking an informed financial decision.
(b) Key Facts Statement (KFS)
is a statement of key facts of a loan agreement, in simple and easier to understand language, provided to the borrower in a standardised format.
(c) Annual Percentage Rate (APR)
is the annual cost of credit to the borrower which includes interest rate and all other charges associated with the credit facility.
(d) Equated Periodic Instalment (EPI)
is an equated or fixed amount of repayments, consisting of both the principal and interest components, to be paid by a borrower towards repayment of a loan at periodic intervals for a fixed number of such intervals; and which result in complete amortisation of the loan. EPIs at monthly intervals are called EMIs.
Other words and expressions not defined above, but used in this circular, shall have the same meaning as assigned to them under the
Master Direction on Interest Rate on Advances (2016)
as updated from time to time or any other relevant regulation issued by the Reserve Bank.
4. REs shall provide a KFS to all prospective borrowers to help them take an informed view before executing the loan contract, as per the standardised format given in the
Annex A
. The KFS shall be written in a language understood by such borrowers. Contents of KFS shall be explained to the borrower and an acknowledgement shall be obtained that he/she has understood the same.
5. Further, the KFS shall be provided with a unique proposal number and shall have a validity period of at least three working days for loans having tenor of seven days or more, and a validity period of one working day for loans having tenor of less than seven days.
1
Explanation
Validity period refers to the period available to the borrower, after being provided the KFS by the RE, to agree to the terms of the loan. The RE shall be bound by the terms of the loan indicated in the KFS, if agreed to by the borrower during the validity period.
6. The KFS shall also include a computation sheet of annual percentage rate (APR), and the amortisation schedule of the loan over the loan tenor. APR will include all charges which are levied by the RE. Illustrative examples of calculation of APR and disclosure of repayment schedule for a hypothetical loan are given in
Annex B
and
C
respectively
.
7. Charges recovered from the borrowers by the REs on behalf of third-party service providers on actual basis, such as insurance charges, legal charges etc., shall also form part of the APR and shall be disclosed separately. In all cases wherever the RE is involved in recovering such charges, the receipts and related documents shall be provided to the borrower for each payment, within a reasonable time.
8. Any fees, charges, etc. which are not mentioned in the KFS, cannot be charged by the REs to the borrower at any stage during the term of the loan, without explicit consent of the borrower.
9. The KFS shall also be included as a summary box to be exhibited as part of the loan agreement.
Exemptions
10. Credit card receivables are exempted from the provisions contained under this circular.
Applicability and Commencement
11. REs shall put in place the necessary systems and processes to implement the above guidelines at the earliest. In any case, all new retail and MSME term loans sanctioned on or after October 1, 2024, including fresh loans to existing customers, shall comply with the above guidelines in letter and spirit without any exception. During the interregnum, the relevant provisions on ‘KFS/Factsheet’ under the extant guidelines shall continue to remain applicable, including the ‘
Guidelines on Digital Lending
’, the
Master Direction on ‘Regulatory Framework for Microfinance Loans’
, and the
circular on ‘Display of Information by Banks’
.
Legal Provisions
12. The above instructions are issued under sections 21, 35A and 56 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, sections 45JA, 45L and 45M of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, and sections 30A and 32 of the National Housing Bank Act, 1987.
Repeal
13. With the issue of these guidelines, the instructions/guidelines contained in the following circulars, issued by the Reserve Bank stand repealed.
No
Circular No.
Date
Subject
1.
DBR.Leg.No.BC.64/09.07.005/2014-15
January 22, 2015
Para 2 (b) of Circular on Display of information by banks
2.
DoR.FIN.REC.95/03.10.038/2021-22
March 14, 2022
Para 6.3, 6.4 & 6.5 of Master Direction – Reserve Bank of India (Regulatory Framework for Microfinance Loans) Directions, 2022
3.
DOR.CRE.REC.66/21.07.001/2022-23
September 02, 2022
Para 5.1, 5.2 of Guidelines on Digital Lending
All the repealed circulars/provisions shall be deemed to have been in force during the relevant periods, prior to the coming into effect of these directions.
Yours faithfully,
Vaibhav Chaturvedi
(Chief General Manager)
1
In view of the stipulation relating to the validity period of the KFS, the provision at paragraph 8 of the ‘Guidelines on Digital Lending’ relating to mandatory minimum number of days for post-sanction cooling-off period, shall stand partially modified as under:
“A borrower shall be given an explicit option to exit digital loan by paying the principal and the proportionate APR without any penalty during this period. The cooling off period shall be determined by the Board of the RE,
subject to the period so determined not being less than one day
. For borrowers continuing with the loan even after look-up period, pre-payment shall continue to be allowed as per extant RBI guidelines.”