(663 kb)
Relaxations in Branch Authorisation Policy
RBI/2013-14/330
DBOD.No.BAPD.BC. 60/22.01.001/2013-14
October 21, 2013
All Domestic Scheduled Commercial Banks
(excluding RRBs)
Madam  / Dear Sir
Section 23 of  the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 –
Relaxations in  Branch Authorisation Policy
Please refer to circular
DBOD.No.BAPD.BC.54/22.01.001/2013-14  dated September 19, 2013
, on the above subject, advising that domestic scheduled commercial banks (other  than RRBs) are permitted to open branches in Tier 1 to Tier 6 centres  without having the need to take permission from Reserve Bank of India in each  case, subject to reporting.
2. Detailed Guidelines in this regard including  reporting requirements are enumerated in
Annex 1
, while some indicative examples  illustrating the above stipulations are given in
Annex 2
.
3. All other  instructions will remain unchanged.
Yours  faithfully,
(Prakash Chandra  Sahoo)
Chief General  Manager
Encl: As above
Annex 1
1. The  opening of new branches and shifting of existing branches of banks is governed  by the provisions of Section 23 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. In terms  of these provisions, banks cannot, without the prior approval of the Reserve  Bank of India (RBI), open a new place of business in India or outside India or  change, otherwise than within the same city, town or village, the location of  the existing place of business. Section 23 (2) of the Banking Regulation Act  lays down that before granting any permission under this section, the Reserve  Bank may require to be satisfied, by an inspection under Section 35 or  otherwise, as to the financial condition and history of the banking company,  the general character of its management, the adequacy of its capital structure  and earning prospects and that public interest will be served by the opening  or, as the case may be, change of location of the existing place of business.
2. Domestic scheduled commercial banks (other  than RRBs) are presently permitted to open branches without prior approval from  Reserve Bank of India in each case, subject to reporting in terms of our  circular DBOD No. BAPD.BC.54 /22.01.001/2013-14 dated September 19, 2013. The guidelines  for authorisation (opening) of branches of domestic scheduled commercial banks  in India are given in the following paragraphs.
3. For  the purpose of branch authorisation policy, a "branch" would include  all branches, i.e., full-fledged branches, specialised branches, satellite offices,  mobile branches, Extension Counters, off-site ATMs (Automated Teller Machines),  administrative offices, controlling offices, service branches (back office or  processing centres), etc.
4. The branch authorisation policy covers  the opening of branches in all Tiers (Tier 1 to 6) of the country. The Tier  wise population group is as per
Appendix 1
. It may be seen therein that Tier 1  comprises metropolitan and urban centres, Tiers 2, 3, and 4 comprise semi-urban  centres and Tiers 5 and 6 comprise rural centres.
5.  For the purposes of ensuring more uniform spatial distribution, banks are  encouraged to open branches in underbanked centres, more precisely, in  underbanked districts of underbanked States. An underbanked centre (whether a  district or State) would be one where the Average Population Per Branch Office  (APPBO) is more than the national average. Thus, though there are bank branches  in these centres, there are not as many branches as would be desirable. While no mandatory number of branches have  been prescribed to be opened in such centres, banks are incentivised for  opening branches in such centres as detailed in para 10 below. A list of  underbanked districts of underbanked States is as per
Appendix 2
.
6.  For increasing banking penetration and financial inclusion, there is a  need to open branches in centres that are unbanked. Unbanked centres are those  which do not have any brick and mortar structure of a scheduled commercial bank  for customer based banking transactions. Therefore, the current branch  authorisation policy mandates that banks have to open at least 25 percent of  all branches opened in a year in unbanked rural centres, as detailed in para 9  (a) below.
7. The general permission available for opening of  branches by domestic scheduled commercial banks in Tier 1 to Tier 6 centres  across the country will encompass specialised branches, extension counters, satellite  offices, service branches, Central Processing Centres (CPCs) and all other  offices/branches of the bank. Thus, banks are not required to approach RBI for  authorisation for opening branches or any other places of business or  administrative offices in any centre.
8. Banks may  formulate an annual plan for the financial year, approved by the Board of the  bank as part of their annual strategy for branch expansion. While formulating  this plan, they may keep various factors in mind such as setting up of low cost  branches, innovative use of technology, including internet banking and virtual  banking to reduce physical footfalls, improving customer service, etc.
9. The opening  of branches during a financial year will be subject to the conditions given  below. Extension counters, satellite offices, mobile branches, CPCs, service  branches and administrative offices can be freely opened in any centre and will  not be reckoned for the purposes of paras (a) and (b) below.
a) At least 25 percent of the total number of branches opened during a financial  year (excluding entitlement for branches in Tier 1 centres given by way of  incentive as stated in para 10 below), must be opened in unbanked rural (Tier 5  and Tier 6) centres, i.e, centres which do not have a brick and mortar  structure of any scheduled commercial bank for customer based banking  transactions.
b) The total number of branches  opened in Tier 1 centres during the financial year (excluding entitlement for  branches in Tier 1 centres given by way of incentive as stated in para 10 below) cannot exceed the total number of  branches opened in Tier 2 to Tier 6 centres and all centres in the North  Eastern States and Sikkim.
10. As stated in para 5 above, since there is a  continuing need for opening more branches in underbanked districts of  underbanked States for ensuring more uniform spatial distribution, banks would  be provided incentive for opening such branches. Accordingly, banks may open  branches in Tier 1 centres, [over and above their eligibility as defined at  para 9 (a) and (b) above], equal to the number of branches opened in Tier 2 to Tier 6 centres of  underbanked districts of underbanked States, excluding such of the branches  opened in unbanked rural centres that are located in the underbanked districts  of underbanked States.
11. Banks have to ensure that all branches opened  during a financial year are in compliance with the norms as stipulated  above. In case a bank is unable to open  all the branches it is eligible for in Tier 1 centres, as per paras 9 and 10  above, it may carry-over (open) these branches during subsequent two years.
12. Banks,  which for some reason are unable to meet their obligations of opening branches  in Tier 2 to 6 centres in aggregate, or in unbanked rural centres (Tiers 5 to 6  centres) during the financial year, must necessarily rectify the shortfall in  the next financial year.
13. Banks were advised vide circular
DBOD. No.  BAPD.BC. 97/22.01.001/2012-13 dated May 28, 2013
, that they may consider  front-loading (prioritising) the opening of branches in unbanked rural centres  over a 3 year cycle co-terminus with their Financial Inclusion Plan (FIP  2013-16). Therefore, credit will continue to be given for the branches opened in unbanked rural  centres in excess of the required 25 percent of the total branches opened  during the year which will be carried forward for achieving the criteria in the  subsequent year of the FIP.
14.  The general permission referred to above would be subject to the  parameters stated in para 9 and 10 above as well as regulatory/supervisory  comfort in respect of the individual banks. RBI would have the option to withhold the  general permission now being granted to banks which fail to meet the above  mentioned criteria along with imposing penal measures on banks which fail to  meet the obligations at paras 9 and 12 above.
15. An annual report of branches actually opened  during the year, for the year ending March 31, should be placed before the  bank’s Board and forwarded to the Department of Banking Operations and Development,  Reserve Bank of India, Central Office, (DBOD, CO), Shahid Bhagat Singh Marg,  Mumbai- 400001, latest by June 30 of that year in the format given in
Appendix  3
. Compliance regarding opening of branches in accordance with the above  stipulations would also be examined during the Annual Financial Inspection of  the bank and discussion of the Financial Inclusion Plans.
16. Presently,  in terms of reporting requirements as laid down in
para 23
of Master Circular  DBOD No. BAPD.BC. 18/22.01.001/2013-14 dated July 01, 2013 on Branch  Authorisation, banks should report details of opening of a new place of  business including Mobile branch/Mobile ATMs, and call centres, and closure,  merger, shifting or conversion of any existing place of business immediately  and in any case not later than two weeks after  opening/closure/merger/shifting/conversion to the Regional Office concerned of the  Department of Banking Supervision (DBS), Reserve Bank of India, except in  respect of branches in Maharashtra and Goa, which should be reported to DBOD,  CO, Mumbai. This reporting requirement would continue.
17. The present quarterly reporting in Proformae  I & II and Proformae III & IV (Annex 14 and 15 of the above mentioned  Master Circular) for the purpose of branch banking statistics to Department of  Statistics and Information Management, Banking Statistics Division, Reserve  Bank of India, Central Office, C-8/9, Bandra-Kurla Complex, Mumbai-400  051 will also continue. Submission of this statement to the Regional Office  concerned of DBS or DBOD, CO (in respect of centres in Maharashtra & Goa) is  however, discontinued.