(126 kb)
UCBs - KYC/AML Standards/Combating Financing of Terrorism/Obligation of Banks under PMLA, 2002 – ‘At par’ cheque facility extended to Cooperative Banks by SCBs
RBI/2013-14/332
UBD.BPD (PCB) Cir. No. 32/14.01.062/2013-14
October 22, 2013
The Chief Executive Officer
All Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks.
Madam / Dear Sir,
Know Your Customer (KYC)/Anti Money Laundering (AML) Standards/Combating  Financing of Terrorism (CFT)/ Obligation of banks under Prevention of Money  Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002 – ‘At par’ cheque facility extended to Cooperative  Banks by Scheduled Commercial Banks
It has been observed that UCBs are utilizing ‘at par’ cheque facility extended by Scheduled Commercial Banks not only for  their own use but also for their customers, including walk-in customers.
2. Keeping in view the systemic and  supervisory concerns that emanate from such an arrangement, UCBs are advised to  utilize the ‘at par’ cheque facility only for the following purposes:
i) for their own use.
ii) for their  account holders who are KYC compliant provided that all transactions of
`
. 50,000.00 or more should be  strictly by debit to the customer’s account.
iii) for walk-in  customers against cash for less than
`
. 50,000.00 per individual.
3. In order to utilise the ‘at par’ cheque facility in the above manner, UCBs should maintain
i) records  pertaining to issuance of ‘at par’ cheques covering inter alia applicant’s name  and account number, beneficiary’s details and date of issuance of the ‘at par’  cheque.
ii) sufficient  balances/drawing arrangements with the commercial bank extending such facility  for purpose of honouring such instruments.
UCBs should also ensure that  all ‘at par’ cheques issued by them are crossed ‘account payee’ irrespective of  the amount involved.
4. UCBs are advised to make use  of more efficient means of remittances for the customers like NEFT or RTGS by  providing such services directly or by becoming sub-members of banks providing  such services as per regulations in this regard issued by RBI from time to  time.
Yours faithfully,
(P.K. Arora)
General  Manager