(29 kb)
Exim Bank's Line of Credit of USD 47 million to the Government of the Republic of Mozambique
RBI/2013-14/354
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.67
October 31, 2013
To
All Category - I Authorised Dealer  Banks
Madam / Sir,
Exim Bank's Line of Credit of USD 47 million
to the Government of the Republic of Mozambique
Export-Import Bank of India (Exim Bank) has entered into an Agreement dated July 04, 2013 with the Government of the Republic of Mozambique, for making available to the latter, a Line of Credit (LOC) of USD 47 million (USD forty Seven  Million) for financing eligible goods, services, machinery and equipment including consultancy services from India for the purpose of financing construction of 1200 houses in Mozambique. The goods, services, machinery and equipment including consultancy services from India for exports under this Agreement are those which are eligible for export under the Foreign Trade Policy of the Government of India and whose purchase may be agreed to be financed by the Exim Bank under this Agreement. Out of the total credit by Exim Bank under this Agreement, the goods and services of the value of at least 65 percent and in case of consultancy services upto 75 per cent of the contract price shall be supplied by the seller from India and the remaining 35 percent goods and services and 25 % in case of consultancy services may be procured by the seller for the purpose of Eligible Contract from outside India.
2. The Credit Agreement under the LOC is effective from October 04, 2013 and the date of execution of Agreement is July  04, 2013. Under the LOC, the last date for opening of Letters of Credit and Disbursement will be 48 months from the scheduled completion date(s) of  contract(s) in the case of project exports and 72 months (July 03, 2019) from the execution date of the Credit Agreement in the case of  supply contracts.
3. Shipments under the LOC will have to be  declared on GR / SDF Forms as per instructions issued by the Reserve Bank from  time to time.
4. No agency commission is payable under the  above LOC. However, if required, the exporter may use his own resources or  utilize balances in his Exchange Earners’ Foreign Currency Account for payment  of commission in free foreign exchange. Authorised Dealer Category- l (AD  Category-l) banks may allow such remittance after realization of full payment  of contract value subject to compliance with the prevailing instructions for  payment of agency commission.
5. AD  Category-I banks may bring the contents of this circular to the  notice of their exporter constituents and advise them to obtain full details of  the Line of Credit from the Exim Bank’s office at Centre One, Floor 21, World  Trade Centre Complex, Cuffe Parade, Mumbai 400 005  or log on to
www.eximbankindia.in
.
6. The  Directions contained in this circular have been issued under sections 10(4) and  11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA), 1999 (42 of 1999) and are  without prejudice to permissions / approvals, if any, required under any other  law.
Yours faithfully,
(C. D. Srinivasan)
Chief General Manager