(75 kb)
UCBs - Financial Inclusion- Access to Banking Services – Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account - FAQs
RBI/2013-14/355
UBD.BPD.(PCB).Cir.No.35/13.01.000/2013-14
October 31, 2013
The Chief Executive Officer
All Primary (Urban) Co-operative  Banks
Madam / Dear Sir,
Financial Inclusion- Access to Banking Services –
Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account (BSBDA) - FAQs
Please refer to our
Circular  UBD.BPD.Cir.No.5/13.01.000/2012-13 dated August 17, 2012
on the  captioned subject, in terms of which banks have been advised to offer ‘Basic  Savings Bank Deposit Account’ with certain minimum common facilities to all  their customers without the requirement of any minimum balance and without any  charges.
2. In view of several queries  received in this regard from banks and members of the public, we are enclosing  a list of “
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
” on the  subject. Regarding accounts opened and operated at Business Correspondent (BC)  outlets, a separate set of FAQs will be issued.
Yours faithfully,
(P.K. Arora)
General Manager
Encl:  As above
Basic Savings  Bank Deposit Account - FAQs
1. Query
What is the definition of “Basic  Savings Bank Deposit Account”(BSBDA)?
Response
All  the existing ‘No-frills’ accounts opened pursuant to guidelines issued vide
circular   UBD.BPD.Cir.No.19/13.01.000/ 2005-06  dated November 24, 2005
and converted into BSBDA in compliance with the  guidelines issued in
circular  UBD.BPD.Cir.No.5/ 13.01.000/2012-13 dated August 17, 2012
as well as fresh  accounts opened under the said circular should be treated as BSBDA.
2. Query
Whether the guidelines issued on ‘no-frills’ account  with 'nil' or very low minimum balances will continue even after the  introduction of ‘Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account’?
Response
No. In supersession of instructions contained in  circular  UBD.BPD.Cir.No.19/13.01.000/2005-06 dated November 24, 2005 on No Frill  accounts, banks have now been advised to offer a 'Basic Savings Bank Deposit  Account' to all their customers vide  UBD.BPD.Cir.No.5/13.01.000/2012-13 dated August  17, 2012, which will offer minimum common facilities as stated therein. Banks  are required to convert the existing 'no-frills' accounts’ into 'Basic Savings  Bank Deposit Accounts'.
3. Query
Can an Individual have any number of 'Basic Savings  Bank Deposit Account' in one bank?
Response
No. An individual is eligible to have only one 'Basic  Savings Bank Deposit Account' in one bank.
4. Query
Whether a 'Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account' holder  can have any other savings bank account in that bank?
Response
Holders of 'Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account' will  not be eligible for opening any other savings bank account in that bank. If a  customer has any other existing savings bank account in that bank, he / she  will be required to close it within 30 days from the date of opening a 'Basic  Savings Bank Deposit Account'.
5 Query
Can an individual have other deposit accounts where one  holds 'Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account’?
Response
Yes. One can have Term/Fixed Deposit, Recurring Deposit  etc., accounts in the bank where one holds 'Basic Savings Bank Deposit  Account'.
6. Query
Whether the ‘Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account’ can be  opened by only certain types of individuals like poor and weaker sections of  the population?
Response
No. The 'Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account' should be  considered as a normal banking service available to all customers, through  branches.
7. Query
Whether there are any restrictions like age, income,  amount etc criteria for opening BSBDA by banks for individuals?
Response
No. Banks are advised not to impose restrictions like  age and income criteria of the individual for opening BSBDA.
8. Query
Is the 'Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account' a part of  furthering the Financial Inclusion objectives of banks?
Response
The aim of introducing 'Basic Savings Bank Deposit  Account' is very much part of the efforts of RBI for furthering Financial  Inclusion objectives. All the accounts opened earlier as 'no-frills' account  vide UBD.BPD.Cir.No.19/13.01.000/2005-06 dated November 24, 2005 should be renamed as  BSBDA as per instructions contained in paragraph 2 of our Circular  UBD.BPD.Cir.No.5/13.01.000/2012-13 dated August 17, 2012.
9. Query
What are KYC norms applicable to BSBDA accounts? Are  there any relaxations in KYC norms for BSBDAs?
Response
The 'Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account' would be  subject to provisions of PML Act and Rules and RBI instructions on Know Your  Customer (KYC) / Anti-Money Laundering (AML) for opening of bank accounts  issued from time to time. BSBDA can also be opened with simplified KYC norms.  However, if BSBDA is opened on the basis of Simplified KYC, the accounts would  additionally be treated as “BSBDA-Small  Account” and would be subject to the conditions stipulated for such  accounts as indicated in para 2.6 (iii) of
Master  Circular No.UBD.BPD.(PCB).MC. No.16 /12.05.001/2012-13 dated July 1, 2013
.
10. Query
Can I have a ‘Small Account’ in ABC Bank as per the  Government of India Notification No.14/2010/F.No.6/2/2007-E.S. dated December  16, 2010. Can I have additionally a 'Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account’?
Response
No, the BSBDA customer cannot have any other savings  bank account in the same bank. If 'Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account’ is  opened on the basis of simplified KYC norms, the account would additionally be  treated as a 'Small Account' and would be subject to conditions stipulated for  such accounts as indicated in para 2.6 (iii) of Master Circular  No.UBD.BPD.(PCB).MC.No.16/12.05.001/2012-13 dated July 1, 2013 on 'KYC norms /  AML Measures/ Combating of Financing of Terrorism (CFT) / Obligation of banks  under PMLA, 2002'.
11. Query
What are the conditions stipulated for accounts which  are additionally to be treated as ‘BSBDA-Small Account’?
Response
As notified in Govt  of India notification dated December 16, 2010, BSBDA-Small Accounts would be  subject to the following conditions:
Total credits in such accounts should  not exceed one lakh rupees in a year.
Maximum balance in the account should  not exceed fifty thousand rupees at any time
The total of debits by way of cash  withdrawals and transfers will not exceed ten thousand rupees in a month
Remittances from abroad can not be  credited to Small Accounts without completing normal KYC formalities
Small accounts are valid for a period  of 12 months initially which may be extended by another 12 months if the person  provides proof of having applied for an Officially Valid Document.
Small Accounts can only be opened at  CBS linked branches of banks or at such branches where it is possible to  manually monitor the fulfilment of the conditions.
12. Query
What kinds of services are available free in the 'Basic  Savings Bank Deposit Account’?
Response
The services available free in the 'Basic Savings Bank  Deposit Account’ will include deposit and withdrawal of cash; receipt / credit  of money through electronic payment channels or by means of deposit /  collection of cheques at bank branches as well as ATMs.
13. Is there requirement of any initial minimum deposit  while opening a BSBDA as per the circular dated August 17, 2012?
Response
There is no requirement for any initial deposit for  opening a BSBDA.
14. Query
Whether banks are free to offer more facilities than  those prescribed for ‘Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account’?
Response
Yes. However, the decision to allow services beyond the  minimum prescribed has been left to the discretion of the banks who can either  offer additional services free of charge or evolve requirements including  pricing structure for additional value-added services on a reasonable and  transparent basis, to be applied in a non-discriminatory manner with prior  intimation to the customers. Banks are required to put in place a reasonable  pricing structure for value added services or prescribe minimum balance  requirements which should be displayed prominently and also informed to the  customers at the time of account opening. Offering such additional facilities  should be non - discretionary, non-discriminatory and transparent to all ‘Basic  Savings Bank Deposit Account’ customers. However, such accounts enjoying  additional facilities will not be treated as BSBDAs.
15. Query
If BSBDA customers have more than 4 withdrawals and  request for cheque book at additional cost, will it cease to be a BSBDA?
Response
Yes. Please refer to response to the Query No. 14.  However, if the bank does not levy any additional charges and offers more  facilities free than those prescribed under BDBDA a/cs without minimum balance  then such a/cs can be classified as BSBDA.
16. Query
Whether the existing facility available in a normal  saving bank account of five free withdrawals in a month in other banks ATMs as  per IBA (DPSS) instructions will hold good for BSBDA?
Response
No. In BSBDA, banks are required to provide free of  charge minimum four withdrawals, through ATMs and other mode including  RTGS/NEFT/Clearing/Branch cash withdrawal/transfer/internet debits/standing  instructions/EMI etc It is left to the banks to either offer free or charge for  additional withdrawal/s. However, in case the banks decide to charge for the  additional withdrawal, the pricing structure may be put in place by banks on a  reasonable, non-discriminatory and transparent manner.
17. Query
Are the banks free to levy Annual ATM Debit Card  charges?
Response
Banks should offer the ATM Debit Cards free of charge  and no Annual fee should be levied on such Cards.
18. Query
Whether Balance enquiry in ATMs also should be counted  within the four withdrawals permitted under BSBDA?
Response
Balance enquiry through ATMs should not be counted in  the four withdrawals allowed free of charge at ATMs.
19. Query
If a customer of BSBDA opts not to have ATM Debit card,  should the bank compel the customer to accept the ATM debit card ?
Response
ATM debit cards may be offered at the time of opening  BSBDA and issued if the customer requests for the same in writing. Banks need  not insist that  a customer accepts ATM debit card.
20. Query
What about customers who are illiterate or old who may  not be in a position to safe keep and use the ATM debit card and PIN associated  with it?
Response
Banks while opening the BSBDA should educate such a customers  about the ATM Debit Card, ATM PIN and risk associated with it. However, if a  customer chooses not to have an ATM  Debit Card, banks need not compel such  customer to accept ATM Debit Card. If, however, customer opts to have an ATM  Debit card, banks should provide the same to BSBDA holders through safe  delivery channels by adopting the same procedure which they have been adopting  for delivery of ATM Debit card and PIN to their other customers.
21. Query
Whether Passbooks are also to be offered free to BSBDA  holders?
Response
Yes. BSBDA holders should be offered passbook facility  free of charge in line with our instructions contained in
Circular  UBD.CO.(PCB).Cir.No.15/09.39.000/2006-07 dated October 16, 2006
.
22. Query
If a customer opens a BSBDA but does not close his  existing Savings Bank Account within 30 days, are banks then free to close such  savings bank accounts?
Response
While opening the BSBDA customers’ consent in writing  be obtained that his existing non-BSBDA Savings Banks accounts will be closed  after 30 days of opening BSBDA and banks are free to close such accounts after  30 days.
23. Query
In certain accounts to which disbursements under  MGNREGA are made weekly, the number of withdrawals may be more than four in a  month of five weeks. In such cases, can banks permit five withdrawals?
Response
In BSBDA, banks are required to provide free of charge  minimum four withdrawals, including through ATM and other mode. Beyond four  withdrawals, it is left to discretion of the banks to either offer free or  charge for additional withdrawal/s. However pricing structure may be put in  place by banks on a reasonable, non-discretionary, non-discriminatory and  transparent manner.
24. Query
What is the prescribed rate of interest payable on  balances in such ‘Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account’?
Response
Our instructions contained in
circular  UBD.BPD(PCB).Cir.No.18/13.01.000/2011-12 dated February 7, 2012
on  Deregulation of Savings Bank Deposit Interest Rate, are applicable to deposits  held in ‘Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account’.
25. Query
In  terms of RBI  circular
DPSS.  CO.CHD. No. 274/03.01.02/2012-13 dated August 10, 2012
, if “payable at par”  / “multi-city” cheques are issued to BSBDA customers based on their request,  can banks prescribe minimum balance requirements?
Response
BSBDA does not envisage cheque book facility in the  minimum facilities that should be provided  to BSBDA customers. They are free to extend any additional facility  including cheque book facility free of charge (in which case the account  remains BSBDA) or charge for the additional facilities (in which case the  account is not BSBDA).
26. Query
What is the time frame available to banks for  converting “No-Frills” Account as Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account? What is  the time frame available to banks for issuing ATM Cards to all the existing  Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account holders?
Response
All the existing “No-Frill” accounts may be treated as  BSBDA accounts from the date of the circular i.e., August 17, 2012 and banks  may offer the prescribed facilities as per the circular such as issuing ATM  card etc., to the existing ‘No-Frill’ account holders as and when the customer  approaches the bank. However, customers opening new accounts after the issue of  our circular should be provided prescribed facilities immediately on opening of  the account.
27. Query
Whether the normal saving bank account can be converted  into BSBDA at the request of customer?
Response
Yes. Such customers should give their consent in  writing and they should be informed of the features and extent of services  available in BSBDAs.