(35 kb)
Amendment to the “Issue of Foreign Currency Convertible Bonds and Ordinary shares (Through Depository Receipt Mechanism) Scheme, 1993”
RBI/2013-14/363
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 69
November 8, 2013
To
All Category – I Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam / Sir,
Amendment  to the “Issue of Foreign Currency Convertible Bonds and Ordinary shares
(Through Depository Receipt  Mechanism) Scheme, 1993”
Attention of  Authorized Dealer Category-I (AD Category-I) banks is invited to
A.P. (DIR  Series) Circular No.11 dated September 5, 2005
regarding issue of American  Depository Receipts (ADRs)/ Global Depository Receipts (GDRs) read with  Paragraph 4 of Schedule 1 to the Foreign  Exchange Management (Transfer or Issue of Security by a Person Resident outside  India) Regulations, 2000 notified vide
Notification No. FEMA.20/2000-RB  dated May 3, 2000
, as amended from time to time, in terms of which unlisted  Indian companies which have not yet accessed Global Depository Receipts/  Foreign Currency Convertible Bond route for raising capital in the  international market were required to have prior or  simultaneous listing in the domestic market.
2. On a review, it has now been decided to allow  unlisted companies incorporated in India to raise capital abroad, without the  requirement of prior or subsequent listing in India, initially for a period of  two years, subject to conditions mentioned below. This scheme will be  implemented from the date of the Government Notification of the scheme, subject  to review after a period of two years. The  investment shall be subject to the following conditions:
(a) Unlisted Indian companies shall list abroad only on  exchanges in IOSCO/FATF compliant jurisdictions or those jurisdictions with  which SEBI has signed bilateral agreements;
(b) The ADRs/ GDRs shall be issued subject to  sectoral cap, entry route, minimum capitalisation norms, pricing norms, etc. as  applicable as per FDI regulations  notified by the Reserve Bank from time to time;
(c) The pricing of such  ADRs/GDRs to be issued to a person resident outside India shall be determined  in accordance with the captioned scheme as prescribed under paragraph 6 of  Schedule 1 of Notification No. FEMA. 20 dated May 3, 2000, as amended from time  to time;
(d) The number of underlying equity shares  offered for issuance of ADRs/GDRs to be kept with the local custodian shall be  determined upfront and ratio of ADRs/GDRs to equity shares shall be decided  upfront based on applicable FDI pricing norms of equity shares of unlisted  company;
(e) The unlisted Indian company shall comply with the instructions on downstream investment as notified by the Reserve Bank  from time to time;
(f) The criteria of eligibility of unlisted company raising funds through ADRs/GDRs shall be as prescribed by  Government of India;
(g) The capital raised abroad may be utilised for retiring outstanding overseas debt or for bona fide operations abroad including for acquisitions;
(h) In case the funds raised are not utilised abroad as  stipulated above, the company shall repatriate the funds to India within 15  days and such money shall be parked only with AD Category-1 banks recognised by RBI and shall be used for eligible purposes;
(i) The unlisted company shall report to the Reserve Bank as prescribed under sub-paragraphs (2) and (3) of Paragraph 4 of Schedule 1 to FEMA Notification No. 20.
3. A copy of the Press Release dated September 27, 2013  issued by Ministry of Finance, Government of India and the Government  Notification dated October 11, 2013 are annexed (
Annex 1
and
2
, respectively).
4. AD Category – I banks may bring the contents of this circular to the notice of their  constituents and customers concerned.
5. The directions contained in this circular  have been issued under sections 10(4) and 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange  Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and are without prejudice to permissions /  approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(Rudra Narayan Kar)
Chief General  Manager-in-Charge