(11 kb)
Third party payments for export / import transactions
RBI/2013-14/364
A. P. (DIR Series) Circular  No.70
November 8 , 2013
To
All Category-I Authorised  Dealer Banks
Madam / Sir,
Third party payments  for export / import transactions
Attention of Authorized Dealer Category – I banks is invited to various provisions of
FEMA  Notification No. 14 dated May 3, 2000
dealing with the manner of receipt & payment for trade  transactions. Normally payment for exports has to be received from the overseas  buyer named in the Export Declaration Form (EDF) by the exporter and the  payment shall be received in a currency appropriate to the place of final  destination as mentioned in the EDF irrespective of the country of residence of  the buyer. Similarly, the payments for the import should be made to the  original overseas seller of the goods and the AD should ensure that the  importer furnishes evidence of import, such as, Exchange Control copy of the Bill  of Entry to satisfy itself that goods equivalent to the value of remittance  have been imported.
2. With a view to further liberalising the procedure relating to  payments for exports/imports and taking into account evolving international  trade practices, it has been decided as under:
i. EXPORT  TRANSACTIONS
AD banks may allow payments  for export of goods / software to be received from a third party (a party other  than the buyer) subject to conditions as under:
Firm  irrevocable order backed by a tripartite agreement should be in place;
Third  party payment should come from a Financial Action Task Force (FATF) compliant  country and through the banking channel only;
The  exporter should declare the third party remittance in the Export Declaration  Form;
It  would be responsibility of the Exporter to realize and repatriate the export  proceeds from such third party named in the EDF;
Reporting  of outstandings, if any, in the XOS would continue to be shown against the name  of the exporter. However, instead of the name of the overseas buyer from where  the proceeds have to be realised, the name of the declared third party should  appear in the XOS; and
In case of shipments being made to a country in  Group II of Restricted Cover Countries, (e.g. Sudan, Somalia, etc.), payments  for the same may be received from an Open Cover Country.
Note:
Restricted cover  Group II country is country which experiences chronic political and economic  problems as well as balance of payment difficulties.
ii. IMPORT TRANSACTIONS
AD banks are allowed to make payments to a third  party for import of goods, subject to conditions as under:
Firm irrevocable purchase  order / tripartite agreement should be in place;
Third party payment should  be made to a Financial Action Task Force (FATF) compliant country and through  the banking channel only;
The Invoice should contain a narration that  the related payment has to be made to the (named) third party;
Bill of Entry should mention the name of the  shipper as also the narration that the related payment has to be made to the  (named) third party;
Importer should comply with the related  extant instructions relating to imports including those on advance payment  being made for import of goods; and
The amount of an import transaction eligible for  third party payment should not exceed USD 100,000. This limit will be revised  as and when considered expedient.
3. These instructions will come into force with immediate effect.
4. AD Category – I banks may bring the contents of this Circular to the  notice of their constituents concerned.
5. The directions contained  in this circular have been issued under sections 10(4) and 11(1) of the Foreign  Exchange Management Act (FEMA), 1999 (42 of 1999) and are without prejudice to  permissions / approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(C.D Srinivasan)
Chief General Manager