(31 kb)
Import of Gold by Nominated Banks /Agencies/Entities
RBI/2013-14/367
A.  P. (DIR Series) Circular No.73
November 11, 2013
To
All Scheduled Commercial  Banks which are Authorised Dealers (ADs) in
Foreign Exchange/ All  Agencies nominated for import of gold
Madam / Sir,
Import of  Gold by Nominated Banks /Agencies/Entities
Attention of Authorised  Persons is drawn to the Reserve Bank’s
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 25 dated August 14, 2013
on the captioned  subject.
2. Government of India and the Reserve  Bank of India have been receiving representations related to Advance Authorisation  (AA) / Duty Free Import Authorisation (DFIA). Taking into account these  representations and in consultation with the Government of India, it has been  decided to issue the following clarifications:
Any  authorisation such as Advance Authorisation (AA) / Duty Free Import  Authorization (DFIA) is to be utilised for import of gold meant for export  purposes only and no diversion for domestic use shall be permitted.For  any AA / DFIA issued prior to 14th August 2013 the condition of sequencing the  imports prior to exports shall not be insisted upon.
3. Notwithstanding  any of the foregoing directions, entities/units in the SEZ and EoUs, Premier  and Star Trading Houses (irrespective of whether they are nominated agencies or  not) are permitted to import gold exclusively for the purpose of exports  only. Similarly, exports towards fulfillment of obligation under  AA/DFIA scheme shall not qualify as export for the purpose of the scheme of  20:80.
4. Authorised Dealers may please bring the  contents of this circular to the notice of their constituents and customers  concerned.
5 The directions contained in this  circular have been issued under Section 10(4) and Section 11(1) of the Foreign  Exchange Management Act (FEMA), 1999 (42 of 1999), and are without prejudice to  permissions / approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(Rudra Narayan Kar)
Chief General Manager-in-Charge