(103 kb)
Financing of Infrastructure - Definition of 'Infrastructure Lending'
RBI/2013-14/378
DBOD.BP.BC.No.66/08.12.014/2013-14
November 25, 2013
All  Scheduled Commercial Banks
(excluding RRBs) and
All India Term-Lending and  Refinancing Institutions
(EXIM Bank, NABARD, NHB and SIDBI)
Dear Sir,
Financing of Infrastructure - Definition of 'Infrastructure Lending'
Please refer to our
circular  DBOD.BP.BC.No.58/08.12.014/2012-13 dated November 20, 2012
on ‘Definition of Infrastructure Lending’ harmonising the RBI definition of Infrastructure Lending with that of the ‘Master List of Infrastructure  sub-sectors’ notified by the Government of India on March 27, 2012 and its  subsequent updation vide our
circular DBOD.BP.BC.No.106 /08.12.014 /2012-13 dated June 28, 2013
.
2. The Government of  India has further updated the Harmonised  Master List of Infrastructure sub-sectors vide Gazette Notification dated October 7, 2013 and the following new sub-sectors have been added in  the Master List:
Hotels with project cost of more than Rs.200 crores each in any place in India and of any star rating.
Convention Centres with project cost of more  than Rs.300 crores each.
3. Accordingly, an updated list of sub-sectors for infrastructure lending by banks and select All India Term-Lending and Refinancing Institutions is given in the
Annex
. The new sub-sectors will get classified as ‘Infrastructure’ for the purpose of lending by banks and select All India Term-Lending and Refinancing Institutions from the date of this circular and  will be subject to the conditions mentioned therein.
Yours faithfully,
(Chandan Sinha)
Principal Chief General Manager
Annex
List  of sub-sectors for ‘Infrastructure Lending’
A credit facility  extended by lenders (i.e. banks and select All India Term-Lending and  Refinancing Institutions) to a borrower for exposure in the following infrastructure  sub-sectors will qualify as ‘infrastructure lending’:
Category
Infrastructure sub-sectors
Transport
Roads and bridges
Ports
1
Inland Waterways
Airport
Railway Track, tunnels, viaducts, bridges
2
Urban Public Transport (except rolling stock in case of urban road transport)
Energy
Electricity Generation
Electricity Transmission
Electricity Distribution
Oil pipelines
Oil/Gas/Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) storage facility
3
Gas pipelines
4
Water & Sanitation
Solid Waste Management
Water supply pipelines
Water treatment plants
Sewage collection, treatment and disposal system
Irrigation (dams, channels, embankments etc)
Storm Water Drainage System
Slurry Pipelines
Communication
Telecommunication (Fixed network)
5
Telecommunication  towers
Telecommunication & Telecom Services
Social and Commercial Infrastructure
Education Institutions (capital stock)
Hospitals (capital stock)
6
Three-star or higher category classified hotels located outside cities with population of more than 1 million
Common infrastructure for industrial parks, SEZ, tourism facilities and agriculture markets
Fertilizer (Capital investment)
Post harvest storage infrastructure for agriculture and horticultural produce including cold storage
Terminal markets
Soil-testing laboratories
Cold Chain
7
Hotels with project cost
8
of more than Rs.200 crores each in any place in India and of any star rating;
Convention Centres with project cost
8
of more than Rs.300 crore each.
1. Includes Capital Dredging
2. Includes supporting terminal infrastructure such as loading/unloading terminals, stations and buildings
3. Includes strategic storage of crude oil
4. Includes city gas distribution network
5. Includes optic fibre/cable networks which provide broadband / internet
6. Includes Medical Colleges, Para Medical Training Institutes and Diagnostics Centres
7. Includes cold room facility for farm level pre-cooling, for preservation or storage of agriculture and allied produce, marine products and meat.
8. Applicable with prospective effect from the date of this circular and available for eligible projects for a period of three years; Eligible costs exclude cost of land and lease charges but include interest during construction.