(34 kb)
External Commercial Borrowings (ECB) by Holding Companies / Core Investment Companies for the project use in Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs)
RBI/2013-14/397
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 78
December 3,  2013
To
All Authorised Dealer Category I Banks
Madam / Sir
External Commercial Borrowings (ECB) by Holding Companies /  Core Investment Companies for the project use in Special Purpose Vehicles  (SPVs)
Attention of Authorized Dealer Category-I (AD Category-I) banks is  invited to the
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 5 dated August 1, 2005
as amended  from time to time relating to the External Commercial Borrowings (ECB).
2. In order to strengthen the flow of resources to  infrastructure sector, it has been decided to permit Holding Companies / Core  Investment Companies (CICs) coming under the regulatory framework of the Reserve  Bank to raise ECB under the automatic  route/approval route, as the case may be, for project use in Special Purpose  Vehicles (SPVs) with the following terms and conditions:
The business  activity of the SPV should be in the infrastructure sector where “infrastructure” is defined as per the extant ECB  guidelines;
The infrastructure  project is required to be implemented by the SPV established exclusively for  implementing the project;
The ECB proceeds is  utilized either for fresh capital expenditure (capex) or for refinancing of  existing Rupee loans (under the approval route) availed of from the domestic  banking system for capex as per the extant norms on refinancing;
The ECB for SPV can be  raised up to 3 years after the Commercial Operations Date of the SPV;
The SPV should give an  undertaking that no other method of funding, such as, trade credit (if for  import of capital goods), etc. will be utilized for that portion of fresh  capital expenditure financed through ECB proceeds;
The ECB proceeds should  be kept in a separate escrow account as per the extant guidelines on parking of  ECB proceeds pending utilization for permissible end-uses and use of such  proceeds should be strictly monitored by the ADs for permissible uses;
In case of Holding Companies  that come under the Core Investment Company (CIC) regulatory framework of the Reserve  Bank, the additional terms and conditions for raising ECB for project use in  SPVs will be as under:
a) 
          The ECB availed is within the ceiling of leverage  stipulated for CICs, i.e., their outside liabilities including ECB cannot be  more than 2.5 times of their adjusted net worth as on the date of the last  audited balance sheet; and
b) 
          In case of CICs with asset size below Rupees 100 crore,  the ECB availed of should be on fully hedged basis.
3. The above modifications  to the ECB guidelines will come into force with immediate effect. All other  aspects of extant ECB guidelines (including provisions contained in
A.P. (DIR  Series) Circulars No. 25
and
111
dated September 23, 2011 and April 20, 2012 to  the effect that maximum 25 per cent of ECB raised by the infrastructure  companies can be utilised for refinancing of the Rupee loans availed from the  domestic banking system (40 per cent in case of power sector) under the  approval route) shall remain unchanged.
4. AD  Category-I banks may bring the contents of this circular to the notice of their  constituents and customers.
5. The directions  contained in this circular have been issued under sections 10(4) and 11(1) of  the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and are without  prejudice to permissions / approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours faithfully
C D Srinivasan
Chief General Manager