(144 kb)
Application of Minimum Capital Adequacy Norms to State and Central Cooperative Banks (StCBs/CCBs)
RBI/2013-14/433
RPCD.RCB.BC.73/07.51.012/2013-14
January  7, 2014
The Chairman / Managing Director
All  State and Central Cooperative Banks
Dear Sir / Madam,
Application of Minimum  Capital Adequacy Norms to
State and Central  Cooperative Banks (StCBs/CCBs)
Please refer to the
circular RPCD.CO.RF.BC.40/07.38.03/2007-08 dated December 4, 2007
wherein the  State and Central Cooperative Banks had been advised to disclose the level of  Capital to Risk weighted Assets Ratio (CRAR) as on March 31, 2008 and  thereafter every year as ‘Notes on Accounts’ to their Balance Sheets. It was  also advised that the roadmap for achieving the desired level of CRAR norms  would be communicated in due course.
2. In  the context of financial stability of the rural cooperative banking system and  to strengthen the capital structure of State and Central Cooperative Banks  (StCBs/CCBs), it is decided to prescribe a minimum CRAR for StCBs/CCBs.  Accordingly, StCBs/CCBs are advised to achieve a minimum CRAR of 9% in a phased  manner over a period of three years as indicated below:
As on March 31, 2015             -           7%
As on March 31, 2017             -           9%
StCBs/CCBs are advised to maintain a mandated minimum  CRAR of 7% on an ongoing basis with effect from March 31, 2015 and 9% with  effect from March 31, 2017.
3. Further, it is decided that StCBs/CCBs be  permitted to issue Long Term (Subordinated) Deposits (LTD) and Innovative  Perpetual Debt Instruments (IPDI) to facilitate raising of capital funds (Tier  I and Tier II) for the purpose of compliance with the prescribed CRAR norms,. The guidelines for issuance of LTD and  IPDI are set out in (
Annex-I
) and (
Annex-II
) respectively.
4. The other contents of the circular  RPCD.CO.RF.BC.40/07.38.03/2007-08 dated December 4, 2007 remain unchanged.
5. Please  acknowledge receipt this circular to the concerned Regional Office within whose  jurisdiction the StCB/CCB is located.
Yours faithfully,
(A. Udgata)
Principal Chief General Manager
Encl.  As above
ANNEX  - I
Guidelines  to State/Central Co-operative Banks on
Issuance of Long Term (Subordinated) Deposits
Term of Issue
1. State/Central Co-operative Banks (StCBs/CCBs) may issue Long Term  (Subordinated) Deposits (LTD) with the prior permission of the respective  Registrar (RCS) granted in consultation with the Reserve Bank. LTD may be  issued to members and non-members, including those outside the area of  operations of the StCBs/CCBs   concerned.  There is no prohibition on existing shareholders subscribing to LTD. The amounts  raised through LTD, which comply with the following terms and conditions will  be eligible to be treated as lower Tier II capital
Maturity
2.1 LTD should have a minimum  maturity of not less than 5 years.
Limits
2.2 The  outstanding amount of LTD, which is eligible to be reckoned as Tier II capital,  will be limited to 50 percent of Tier I capital. The above limit will be based  on the amount of Tier I capital after deduction of goodwill and other  intangible assets but before the deduction of equity investments in  subsidiaries, if any.
Amount
2.3 The amount to be raised may be  decided by the Board of Directors of banks.
Seniority of Claims
2.4 LTD  will be subordinated to the claims of depositors and other creditors but would  rank senior to the claims of shareholders, including holders of preference  shares (both Tier I & Tier II). Among investors of instruments included in  lower Tier II, the claims shall rank
pari  passu
with each other.
2.5 Options
(a) LTD shall not be issued with a  'put option' or a 'step up' option.
(b) The  'call option' will be permissible and may be exercised after 5 years with prior  permission of the Reserve Bank. While considering the proposals received from  banks for exercising the call option the Reserve Bank would, among other  things, take into consideration the bank's CRAR position both at the time of  exercise of the call option and after exercise of the call option.
Redemption /  Prepayment
2.6  Repayment of LTD at maturity shall be made only with the prior approval of the  Reserve Bank of India (Rural Planning and Credit Department, Central Office)  subject inter alia to the following conditions :
(i) The  bank's CRAR is above the minimum regulatory requirement prescribed by the  Reserve Bank.
(ii) The  impact of such repayment does not result in bank's CRAR falling below or remaining  below the minimum regulatory requirement prescribed by the Reserve Bank.
Interest Rate
2.7 LTD  may bear a fixed rate of interest or a floating rate of interest referenced to  a market determined rupee interest benchmark rate.
DICGC Cover
2.8 LTD will not be eligible for  DICGC cover
Progressive Discount
2.9 These  deposits will be subjected to a progressive discount for capital adequacy  purposes as under :
Remaining    Period of Maturity
Rate    of Discount
Less than one year
100%
More than one year and Less than    two years
80%
More than two years and less than    three years
60%
More than three years and less    than four years
40%
More than four years and less than    five years
20%
Classification in the Balance Sheet
2.10 These  instruments will be classified as 'borrowings' and shown separately in the  Balance Sheet.
Reserve Requirement
2.11.  Total amount raised by a bank through the issue of LTD will be reckoned as a  liability for the computation of net demand and time liabilities for the  purpose of reserve requirements (CRR and SLR).
Reporting Requirements
4. Banks  issuing such long LTD shall submit a report to the Principal Chief General  Manager, Rural Planning and Credit Department, Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai  giving details of the deposit raised, including the terms of issue specified as  above.
Investment in / Grant of Advances against LTD
5.  StCBs/CCBs   should not invest in LTD of  other StCBs/CCBs; nor they should grant advances against the security of LTD  issued by them or by other banks
ANNEX - II
Terms and  conditions applicable to Innovative Perpetual Debt Instruments (IPDI)) for  inclusion as Tier I capital
The  Innovative Perpetual Debt Instruments (Innovative Instruments) that may be  issued as bonds or debentures by StCBs/CCBs should meet the following terms and  conditions to qualify for inclusion as Tier I Capital for capital adequacy  purposes.
1.  Terms of  Issue of Innovative Instruments
(i) RBI Approval
Banks shall obtain prior  approval of the Reserve Bank of India, on a case-by-case basis, for issue of  innovative instruments.
(ii) Amount
The amount of innovative instruments to be raised may be decided by the Board  of Directors of banks.
(iii) Limits
Innovative  instruments shall not exceed 15 per cent of total Tier I capital.   Innovative instruments in excess of the above limits shall be eligible for  inclusion under Tier II, subject to limits prescribed for Tier II  capital.  However, investors' rights and obligations would remain  unchanged.
(iv) Maturity  period
The innovative instruments  shall be perpetual.
(v) Rate of  interest
The interest payable to the  investors may be either at a fixed rate or at a floating rate referenced to a  market determined rupee interest benchmark rate.
(vi) Options
Innovative  instruments shall not be issued with a 'put option'.   However,    banks may issue the instruments with a call option  subject to strict compliance with each of the following conditions:
(a) Call option may be  exercised after the instrument has run for at least ten years; and
(b)  Call option shall be exercised only with the prior approval of RBI (Rural  Planning and Credit Department).  While considering the proposals received  from banks for exercising the call option the RBI would, among other things,  take into consideration the bank's CRAR position both at the time of exercise  of the call option and after exercise of the call option.
(vii) Step-up  option
The  issuing bank may have a step-up option which may be exercised only once during  the whole life of the instrument, in conjunction with the call option, after  the lapse of ten years from the date of issue.  The step-up shall not be  more than 100 bps.  The limits on step-up apply to the all-in-cost of the  debt to the issuing banks.
(viii) Lock-in-Clause
(a) Innovative instruments shall be subjected to a lock-in-clause in terms of  which the issuing bank shall not be liable to pay interest, if
1. the bank's CRAR is below the minimum regulatory  requirement prescribed by RBI; OR
2. the impact of such payment  results in bank's capital to risk assets ratio (CRAR) falling below or  remaining below the minimum regulatory requirement prescribed by Reserve Bank  of India;
(b)  However, banks may pay interest with the prior approval of RBI when the impact  of such payment may result in net loss or increase the net loss, provided the  CRAR remains above the regulatory norm.
(c) The interest shall not  be cumulative.
(d)  All instances of invocation of the lock-in-clause should be notified by the  issuing banks to the Principal Chief General Manager, Rural Planning and Credit  Department, Reserve Bank of India, Central Office, Mumbai.
(ix) Seniority of  claim
The claims of the investors in innovative instruments shall be
(a) Superior to the  claims of investors in equity shares; and
(b) Subordinated to the claims of  all other creditors.
(x) Discount
The  innovative instruments shall not be subjected to a progressive discount for  capital adequacy purposes since these are perpetual.
(xi) Other  conditions
Innovative instruments  should be fully paid-up, unsecured, and free of any restrictive clauses.
2. Compliance  with Reserve Requirements
The  total amount raised by a bank through innovative instruments will not be  reckoned as liability for the calculation of net demand and time liabilities  for the purpose of reserve requirements and, as such, will not attract CRR /SLR  requirements.