(49 kb)
Know Your Customer (KYC) norms/Anti-Money Laundering (AML) standards / Combating the Financing of Terrorism (CFT) Obligation of Authorised Persons under Prevention of Money Laundering Act, (PMLA), 2002, as amended by Prevention of Money Laundering (Amendment) Act, 2009 Money changing activities
RBI/2013-14/455
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.97
January  20, 2014
To,
All Authorised  Persons
Madam/ Sir,
Know Your  Customer (KYC) norms/Anti-Money Laundering (AML) standards / Combating the  Financing of Terrorism (CFT) Obligation of Authorised Persons under Prevention  of Money Laundering Act, (PMLA), 2002, as amended by Prevention of Money  Laundering (Amendment) Act, 2009 Money changing activities
Attention  of Authorised Persons is invited to F-Part-II of the Annex to the
A.P. (Dir  Series) Circular No. 17 [A.P. (FL/RL Series) Circular No. 04] dated November  27, 2009
, as amended from time to time.
2.  Based on several representations received from Authorised Money Changers (AMCs),  regarding difficulties in submitting Resolution of the Board of Directors for  undertaking foreign exchange transactions with an AMC and also Power of  Attorney granted to its officials to conduct forex transactions on behalf of  the company, it has been decided to rationalise the same. Accordingly, the  requirement of Resolution of the Board of Directors is being done away with and  a corporate may now submit to the AMC a list of officials with names and  signatures authorized by the Managing Director / Chief Financial Officer of the  company toconduct forex transactions on its behalf. The amended  instructions are given in the
Annex
.
3.  All the other instructions contained in the A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 17  [A.P. (FL/RL Series) Circular No. 04] dated November 27, 2009, as amended from  time to time shall remain unchanged.
4.  Authorised Persons may bring the contents of this circular to the notice of  their constituents concerned.
5. These guidelines are also applicable  mutatis mutandis to all agents/ franchisees of Authorised Persons and it will  be the sole responsibility of the franchisers to ensure that their agents /  franchisees also adhere to these guidelines.
6.  Please advise your Principal Officer to acknowledge receipt of this circular  letter.
7.  The directions contained in this Circular have been issued under Section 10(4)  and Section 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999)and  also under the, Prevention of Money Laundering Act, (PMLA), 2002, as amended by  Prevention of Money Laundering (Amendment) Act, 2009 and Prevention of  Money-Laundering (Maintenance of Records of the Nature and Value of  Transactions, the Procedure and Manner of Maintaining and Time for Furnishing  Information and Verification and Maintenance of Records of the Identity of the  Clients of the Banking Companies, Financial Institutions and Intermediaries)  Rules, 2005 as amended from time to time and are without prejudice to  permission /approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
Rudra Narayan Kar
Chief General Manager-in-Charge
Annex
[Annex to A.P. (DIR Series)  Circular No.97 dated January 20, 2014]
Extant Guidelines
Revised    Guidelines
Features
Documents
Features
Documents
Establishment of    Business Relationship - Corporate
Certified copy each of the    following documents.
(i) Certificate of    incorporation
(ii) Memorandum & Articles of Association
(iii) Resolution of the Board of Directors for undertaking forex transactions    with the AP
(iv) Power of attorney granted to its managers, officers or employees    to conduct forex transactions on behalf of the corporate and their    identification.
(v) PAN Card
(vi) Telephone Bill
Establishment of    Business Relationship - Corporate
Certified copy each of the    following documents.
(i) Certificate of    incorporation
(ii) Memorandum & Articles of Association
(iii) List of officials with names, designation and signatures authorized by    the Managing Director / Chief Financial Officer of the company to    conduct forex transactions on behalf of the company
(iv) PAN Card
(v) Telephone Bill
Note:
Corporate should invariably pay to AMCs towards    rupee leg of forex transactions through a cheque/bank account of corporate    irrespective of the amount of forex transaction