(111 kb)
UCBs- Legal Guardianship Certificates Issued under the Mental Health Act, 1987 and National Trust for the Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999
RBI/2013-14/456
UBD.BPD.(PCB) CIR No.44/13.01.000/2013-14
January   21, 2014
The Chief Executive Officers  of
All Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks
Madam/Dear Sir,
Legal  Guardianship Certificates Issued under the Mental Health Act, 1987
and  National Trust for the Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral
Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999
Please refer to our
Circular UBD.CO.BPD.No.27/12.05.001/2007-08 dated December  4, 2007
, in terms of which Urban  Co-operative Banks (UCBs) were advised, inter alia, to rely upon the  Guardianship Certificate issued either by the District Court under Mental  Health Act, 1987 or by the Local Level Committees under the National Trust for  the Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and  Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999 for the purposes of opening / operating bank  accounts by disabled persons with autism, cerebral palsy, mental retardation  and multiple disabilities.
2. In supersession of the instructions contained in  the above mentioned circular, following guidelines would be applicable for the  purpose of opening / operating bank accounts:
(i) The Mental Health Act, 1987 provides for a law  relating to the treatment and care of mentally ill persons and to make better  provision with respect to their property and affairs. According to the said  Act, “mentally ill person” means a person  who is in need of treatment by reason of  any mental  disorder other than  mental retardation. Sections 53 and 54 of this Act provide for the appointment  of guardians for mentally ill persons and in certain cases, managers in respect  of their property. The prescribed appointing authorities are the district  courts and collectors of districts under the Mental Health Act, 1987.
(ii) The National Trust for Welfare of Persons  with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act,  1999 provides for a law relating to certain specified disabilities. Clause (j)  of Section 2 of that Act defines a “person with disability” to mean a person  suffering from any of the conditions relating to autism, cerebral palsy, mental  retardation or a combination of any two or more of such conditions and includes  a person suffering from severe multiple disabilities. This Act empowers a Local  Level Committee to appoint a guardian to a person with disabilities, who shall have  the care of the person and property of the disabled person.
3. UCBs are  advised to take note of the legal position mentioned above and may rely on and be guided by the  orders/certificates issued by the competent authority, under the respective  Acts, appointing guardians/managers for the purposes of opening/ operating bank  accounts. In case of doubt, care may be taken to obtain proper legal advice.
4. UCBs may also ensure that their branches give  proper guidance to their customers so that the guardians/managers of the  disabled persons do not face any difficulties in this regard.
Yours faithfully,
(A.K.Bera)
Principal  Chief General Manager