(33 kb)
Conversion of debt into shares, consent level of security enforcement actions and permission to acquire debt from other SC/RCs
RBI/2013-2014/460
DNBS (PD) CC. No. 35/SCRC/26.03.001/2013-2014
January 23, 2014
The Chairman/Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer
All registered Securitisation Companies/Reconstruction Companies
Dear Sir,
Conversion of debt  into shares, consent level of security enforcement actions
and permission to  acquire debt from other SC/RCs
Please refer to “The Securitisation Companies and Reconstruction Companies (Reserve Bank)  Guidelines and Directions, 2003” dated April 23, 2003 (herein after called Guidelines) and
DNBS.PD  (SC/RC)  CC.No.13/26.03.001/2008-09 dated April 22, 2009
.
2. Pursuant to the amendments made in Securitisation  and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest  Act, 2002 (SARFAESI Act, 2002) and on the recommendations of the Key Advisory  Group (KAG) constituted by the Government of India on the Asset Reconstruction  Companies (ARCs), Reserve Bank of India advises as under:
a) Securitisation  Companies / Reconstruction Companies (SC/RCs) are permitted to convert a portion  of debt into shares of the borrower company as a measure of asset reconstruction  provided their shareholding does not exceed 26% of  the post converted equity of the company under  reconstruction.
b) Securitisation Companies / Reconstruction Companies (SC/RCs) are required  to obtain, for the purpose of enforcement of security interest, the consent of  secured creditors holding not less than 60% of the amount outstanding to  a borrower as against 75% hitherto.
c) Securitisation Companies / Reconstruction Companies (SC/ RCs) are permitted to acquire debt from other SC/ RCs on  following conditions:
i. The  acquisition is for the purpose of debt aggregation for the enforcement of  security interest and as such the acquiring SC/RC’s (herein after referred as  aggregating SC/RC) existing holdings at the time of acquisition are less than  60% and with the further proposed acquisition from other SC/ RCs, the total  debt in the books of the aggregating SC/RC shall add up to 60% or more of the  total secured debt.
ii. The  transaction is settled on cash basis.
iii. The  selling SC/RC will utilize the proceeds so received, for the purpose of  redemption of underlying Security Receipts.
iv. The acquisition of  debt from other SC/RC, shall not
result  in extension of the date of redemption of the SRs issued by the aggregating  SC/RC for the assets acquired from banks/FIs.
extend the period of realization of assets including  that acquired from other SC/RCs beyond eight years from the date of acquisition  of the asset by the aggregating SC/RC from the banks/FIs concerned.
3. A
Notification DNBS (PD-SC/RC) No.10/PCGM (NSV)/-2014 dated January 23, 2014
amending  paragraph 7 of ‘The Securitisation Companies and Reconstruction Companies  (Reserve Bank) Guidelines and Directions, 2003’ is enclosed.
Yours sincerely,
(N.S. Vishwanathan)
Principal Chief General  Manager
Reserve Bank of India
Department of Non-Banking Supervision
Central Office
World Trade Centre
Mumbai 400 005
Notification DNBS(PD-SC/RC) No.10/PCGM  (NSV)/-2014 dated January 23, 2014
The Reserve Bank of India,  having considered it necessary in the public interest, and being satisfied  that, for the purpose of enabling the Reserve Bank to regulate the financial  system to the advantage of the country and to prevent the affairs of any Securitisation Company or Reconstruction  Company from being conducted in a manner detrimental to the interest of  investors or in any manner prejudicial to the interest of such Securitisation  Company or Reconstruction Company, in exercise of the powers conferred under  Section 3, 9, 12 and 13 of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial  Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002, hereby directs that ‘The  Securitisation Companies and Reconstruction Companies (Reserve Bank) Guidelines  and Directions, 2003’ contained in Notification No. DNBS 2/CGM(CSM) -2003 dated  April 23, 2003 (hereinafter called directions) shall stand amended with  immediate effect, as follows:-
2. In sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 7, the  following new clause (iv) shall be  inserted :
“(iv)
Permission to SC/RCs to acquire  financial assets from other SC/RCs.
Securitisation  Companies / Reconstruction Companies (SC/  RCs) are permitted to acquire debt from other SC/ RCs on  following conditions:
i. The acquisition is for the  purpose of debt aggregation for the enforcement of security interest and as  such the acquiring SC/RC’s (herein after referred as aggregating SC/RC) existing  holdings at the time of acquisition are less than 60% and with the further  proposed acquisition from other SC/ RCs, the total debt in the books of the aggregating  SC/RC shall add up to 60% or more of the total secured debt.
ii. The transaction is settled  on cash basis.
iii. The selling SC/RC will  utilize the proceeds so received, for the purpose of redemption of underlying  Security Receipts.
iv. The acquisition of debt  from other SC/RC, shall not
result  in extension of the date of redemption of the SRs issued by the aggregating  SC/RC for the assets acquired from banks/FIs.
extend  the period of realization of assets including that acquired from other SC/RCs  beyond eight years from the date of acquisition of the asset by the aggregating  SC/RC from the banks/FIs concerned.”
3. The  following sub-paragraph (5-A) shall be inserted after  sub-paragraph (5) in Paragraph 7:
“(5-A)
Conversion  of any portion of debt into shares of a borrower company
(i) Every Securitisation Company or Reconstruction  Company shall frame a policy, duly approved by the Board of Directors, laying  down the broad parameters for conversion of debt into shares of the borrower  company ;
(ii) In cases of the Financial Assets which have turn  around potential after restructuring but normally with huge default and  unsustainable level of debt, it will be necessary to arrive at sustainable  level of debt, on the basis of evaluation of detailed business plan with  projected level of operations, which can be serviced by the company. A part of  residual unsustainable debt may have to be converted to equity for an optimal  debt equity structure. While SC/RCs are permitted to  have significant influence or have a say in decisions surrounding the borrower  company’s turn around through conversion of debt into shares, they should not  be seen to be running the companies. The shareholding of the SC/RC shall not  exceed 26% of the post converted equity of the company under reconstruction.”
4. In  clause (i) of sub-paragraph (6) of paragraph  7, the following new sub-clause(e) shall be inserted after sub-clause (d)
“(e)  conversion of any portion of debt into shares of a borrower company.”
(N.S.Vishwanathan)
Principal Chief General Manager