(177 kb)
Third Quarter Review of Monetary Policy 2013-14
On the basis of an assessment of the  current and evolving macroeconomic situation, it has been decided to:
increase the policy repo rate under the liquidity adjustment facility  (LAF) by 25 basis points from 7.75 per cent to 8.0 per cent; and
keep the cash reserve ratio (CRR) of scheduled banks unchanged at 4.0  per cent of net demand and time liability (NDTL).
Consequently, the reverse repo rate under  the LAF stands adjusted at 7.0 per cent, and the marginal standing facility  (MSF) rate and the Bank Rate at 9.0 per cent.
Assessment
2. Since the Mid-Quarter Review of December 2013, the global recovery  is gaining traction, led by the strengthening of the US economy, but it is  still uneven and subdued in the Euro area and Japan, and a slowdown in China  seems to be underway. Notwithstanding the boost from stronger external demand,  uncertainty continues to surround the prospects for some emerging economies,  with domestic fragilities getting accentuated. Financial market contagion is a  clear potential risk.
3. Domestically, some loss of momentum of growth is likely in Q3 of  2013-14, despite a strong pick-up in
rabi
sowing. Industrial activity remains in contractionary mode, mainly on account  of manufacturing, which declined for the second month in succession during Q3.  Consumption demand continues to weaken and lacklustre capital goods production  points to stalled investment demand. Fiscal tightening through Q3 and Q4 is  likely to exacerbate the weakness in aggregate demand. Lead indicators of  services suggest a subdued outlook, barring some pick-up in transport and  communication activity.
4. While retail inflation measured by the  consumer price index (CPI) declined significantly on account of the anticipated disinflation in vegetable  and fruit prices, it remains elevated at close to double digits. Moreover,  inflation excluding food and fuel has also been high, especially in respect of  services, indicative of wage pressures and other second round effects. In terms  of the wholesale price index (WPI), headline inflation eased to a four-month low with the sharp decline  in vegetable and fruit prices. Non-food manufactured products (NFMP)  inflation, however, rose in December on an uptick in prices of chemicals,  non-metallic minerals and paper products. Hardening prices of services and key  intermediates seen in conjunction with rising bank credit, increase in order  books, pick-up in capacity utilisation and the decline in inventories of raw  materials and finished goods in relation to sales suggests that aggregate  demand pressures are still imparting an upside to overall inflation. It is critical to address these  risks to the inflation outlook resolutely in order to stabilise and anchor inflation  expectations, even while recognising the economy is weak and substantial fiscal  tightening is likely in Q4.
5. Liquidity conditions were impacted by the mid-December advance tax  outflows. Recourse to the MSF rose from an average of
`
27  billion during the first half of December to an average of
`
250 billion in the second  half, and the weighted average call rate moved up to 8.4 per cent from sub-LAF  overnight repo rate levels. Although liquidity eased in the first week of  January 2014 due to large redemptions by the Government, it started tightening  thereafter with the build-up of Government’s cash balances with the Reserve  Bank. In order to normalise liquidity conditions in the face of these  frictional pressures, the Reserve Bank conducted 7-day term repos of
`
100 billion on January 10, followed by 28-day term repos on  January 17 and 21 cumulating to
`
300 billion, in addition to the  normal liquidity provision of
`
1.4 trillion under overnight, 7-day and  14-day repos, and export credit refinance taken together. After assessing that  market liquidity would likely remain tight for a while, and keeping in view the  need to accommodate normal credit growth, open market purchase operations of
`
95 billion were conducted on January 22 in order to provide  liquidity of a more permanent nature. The weighted average call rate has eased  in response to these operations. The Reserve Bank is engaged in active  management of liquidity to offset frictional and structural pressures so that  there is adequate credit flow to the supply side of the economy.
6. For the period April-December 2013, the trade deficit has shrunk  by 25 per cent from its level a year ago, with merchandise exports increasing  on a y-o-y basis for the sixth consecutive month in December, while non-oil  imports have continued to decline.   Accordingly, the current account deficit (CAD) for 2013-14 is expected  to be below 2.5 per cent of GDP as compared with 4.8 per cent in 2012-13.  The recent resumption of portfolio flows,  both equity and debt, alongside the pick-up in FDI and external commercial  borrowings that is underway should help finance the current account deficit  comfortably. Reserves have been rebuilt since September, and oil marketing  companies have been buying foreign exchange in the market to repay the Reserve  Bank when their swaps come due. Despite a significantly more comfortable  external position than in the summer of 2013, both fiscal and monetary  authorities need to continue their efforts at macroeconomic stabilisation.
Policy Stance and Rationale
7. In the Mid-Quarter Review on December 18, 2013, the policy decision  was to wait for more data before acting. With the subsequent substantial fall  in food prices, especially of vegetables, headline inflation has fallen  significantly. Some of these effects will continue into the next round of data  readings. CPI inflation excluding food and fuel has, however, remained flat and  WPI inflation excluding food and fuel has risen.
8. The Dr. Urjit Patel Committee has indicated a “glide path” for  disinflation that sets an objective of below 8 per cent CPI inflation by  January 2015 and below 6 per cent CPI inflation by January 2016. The Reserve  Bank’s baseline projections set out in the
accompanying Review of Macroeconomic  and Monetary Developments for Q3 of 2013-14
indicate that over the ensuing  12-month horizon, and with the current policy stance, there are upside risks to  the central forecast of 8 per cent. An increase in the policy rate will not  only be consistent with the guidance given in the Mid-Quarter Review but also  will set the economy securely on the recommended disinflationary path. The  extent and direction of further policy steps will be data dependent, though if  the disinflationary process evolves according to this baseline projection,  further policy tightening in the near term is not anticipated at this juncture.
9. If  policy actions succeed in delivering the desired inflation outcome, real GDP  growth can be expected to firm up from a  little below 5 per cent in 2013-14 to a range of 5 to 6 per cent in 2014-15,  with risks balanced around the central estimate of 5.5 per cent. A pick-up in  investment in an environment in which external demand continues to be  supportive of export performance could impart an upside to this forecast.
10. Hereafter,  following the recommendation of the Dr. Urjit Patel Committee,  monetary policy reviews will ordinarily be  undertaken in a two-monthly cycle, consistent with the availability of key  macroeconomic and financial data. Accordingly, the next policy review is  scheduled on Tuesday, April 1, 2014.