(59 kb)
Housing Sector: New Sub-Sector CRE-Residential Housing (CRE-RH) Segment within CRE Sector & Rationalisation of Provisioning and Risk Weight
RBI/2013-14/465
UBD.BPD.(PCB).Cir.No.45/13.05.000/2013-14
January 28, 2014
The Chief Executive Officers of
All Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks
Dear Sir/Madam,
Housing Sector: New Sub-Sector CRE-Residential  Housing (CRE-RH) Segment within CRE Sector & Rationalisation of Provisioning  and Risk Weight
Please refer to paragraph 82 of the Monetary  Policy Statement 2013-14 (
extract enclosed
) on ‘Commercial Real Estate -  Residential Housing: Prudential Norms’, announced on May 3, 2013, wherein it  was stated that a separate sub-sector of ‘CRE-Residential Housing’ will be  carved out of CRE Sector.
2. As loans to the residential housing projects  under the Commercial Real Estate (CRE) Sector exhibit lesser risk and  volatility than the CRE Sector taken as a whole, it has been decided to carve  out a separate sub-sector called ‘Commercial Real Estate–Residential Housing’  (CRE-RH) from the CRE Sector. CRE-RH would consist of loans to  builders/developers for residential housing projects (except for captive  consumption) under CRE segment. Such projects should ordinarily not include  non-residential commercial real estate. However, integrated housing projects  comprising some commercial space (e.g. shopping complex, school, etc.) can also  be classified under CRE-RH, provided that the commercial area in the  residential housing project does not exceed 10% of the total Floor Space Index  (FSI) of the project. In case the FSI of the commercial area in the  predominantly residential housing complex exceeds the ceiling of 10%, the  project loans should be classified as CRE and not CRE-RH.
3. The CRE-RH segment will attract a lower risk  weight of 75% and lower standard asset provisioning of 0.75% as against 100%  and 1.00%, respectively for the CRE segment.
Yours faithfully,
(A. K. Bera)
Principal Chief General Manager
Extract from Monetary Policy Statement 2013-14
Commercial Real Estate -  Residential Housing: Prudential Norms
82. In September 2009, the Reserve Bank had issued  guidelines on classification of certain exposures as Commercial Real Estate  (CRE) exposures. CRE exposures are sensitive in view of their inherent price  volatilities. Therefore, these exposures generally attract higher risk weights  and higher provisioning requirements. However, it has been generally observed  that the residential housing complex sector under the CRE poses lower risk than  the other components of CRE sector. Accordingly, it is proposed to carve out a  sub-sector of ‘CRE-Residential Housing’ within the CRE sector with appropriate  prudential regulatory norms on risk weights and provisioning.