(136 kb)
RRBs/StCBs/CCBs - Legal Guardianship Certificates Issued under the Mental Health Act, 1987and National Trust for the Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999
RBI/2013-14/466
RPCD.CO.RRB.RCB.BC. No.79/03.05.33/2013-14
January 28, 2014
The Chairmen/Chief Executive Officers,
All Regional Rural Banks / State and Central Co-operative Banks
Dear Sir/Madam,
Legal Guardianship Certificates Issued under the  Mental Health Act, 1987 and National Trust for the Welfare of Persons with  Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999
Please refer to our
Circular  RPCD.CO.RRB.No.BC.38/03.05.33/2007-08 dated November 22, 2007
for RRBs and
RPCD.CO.RF.BC.No. 37/07.40.06/2007-08 dated November 20, 2007
for  StCBs and DCCBs wherein banks were advised, inter alia, to rely upon the  Guardianship Certificate issued either by the District Court under Mental  Health Act, 1987 or by the Local Level Committees under the National Trust for  the Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and  Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999 for the purposes of opening / operating bank  accounts by disabled persons with autism, cerebral palsy, mental retardation  and multiple disabilities.
2. In supersession of the instructions contained  in the above mentioned circular, following guidelines would be applicable for  the purpose of opening / operating bank accounts:
I. The Mental Health Act, 1987 provides for a law  relating to the treatment and care of mentally ill persons and to make better  provision with respect to their property and affairs. According to the said  Act, “mentally ill person” means a person who is in need of treatment by reason  of any mental disorder other than mental retardation. Sections 53 and 54 of  this Act provide for the appointment of guardians for mentally ill persons and  in certain cases, managers in respect of their property. The prescribed  appointing authorities are the district courts and collectors of districts  under the Mental Health Act, 1987.
ii. The National Trust for Welfare of Persons with  Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999  provides for a law relating to certain specified disabilities. Clause (j) of  Section 2 of that Act defines a “person with disability” to mean a person  suffering from any of the conditions relating to autism, cerebral palsy, mental  retardation or a combination of any two or more of such conditions and includes  a person suffering from severe multiple disabilities. This Act empowers a Local  Level Committee to appoint a guardian, to a person with disabilities, who shall  have the care of the person and property of the disabled person.
iii. RRBs/StCBs  and DCCBs are advised to take note of the legal position  stated above and may rely on and be guided by the orders/certificates issued by  the competent authority, under the respective Acts, appointing guardians/managers  for the purposes of opening/operating bank accounts. In case of doubt, care may  be taken to obtain proper legal advice.
3. RRBs/StCBs and DCCBs may  also ensure that their branches give proper guidance to their customers so that  the guardians/managers of the disabled persons do not face any difficulties in  this regard.
4. Please acknowledge receipt to our Regional Office  concerned.
Yours faithfully
(A.Udgata)
Principal Chief General Manager