(18 kb)
Foreign investment in India by SEBI registered Long term investors in Government dated Securities
RBI/2013-14/473
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.99
January 29, 2014
To,
All Authorised  Persons
Madam/ Sir,
Foreign investment in India by SEBI registered Long term  investors in
Government dated Securities
Attention  of Authorized Dealer Category-I (AD Category-I) banks is invited to Schedule 5  to the Foreign Exchange Management (Transfer or Issue of Security by a Person  Resident outside India) Regulations, 2000 notified vide
Notification No.  FEMA.20/2000-RB dated May 3, 2000
,  as amended from time to time, in terms of which SEBI registered Foreign  Institutional Investors (FIIs), SEBI registered Qualified Foreign Investors  (QFIs) and long term investors registered with SEBI may purchase, on  repatriation basis Government securities and non-convertible debentures (NCDs)  / bonds issued by an Indian company subject to such terms and conditions as  mentioned therein and limits as prescribed for the same by RBI and SEBI from  time to time.
2.   Attention of AD Category-I banks  is also invited to
A.P.(DIR Series) Circular  No.111 dated June 12, 2013
in terms  of which the present limit for investments by FIIs, QFIs and long term  investors in Government securities stands at USD 30 billion, out of which a  sub-limit of USD 5 billion is available for investment by long term investors  in Government dated securities.
3.  On  a review, it has now been decided, in consultation with Government of India to  enhance, with immediate effect, the existing sub-limit of USD 5 billion  available to long term investors registered with SEBI – Sovereign Wealth Funds (SWFs),  Multilateral Agencies, Pension/ Insurance/ Endowment Funds and Foreign Central Banks for investment in  Government dated securities to USD 10 billion, within the total limit of USD 30  billion available for foreign investments in Government securities.
4.  The  operational guidelines in this regard will be issued by SEBI.
5.  All other existing conditions for  investment in Government securities remain unchanged.
6.   AD Category – I banks may bring  the contents of this circular to the notice of their constituents and customers  concerned.
7.   The directions contained in this  circular have been issued under sections 10(4) and 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange  Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and are without prejudice to permissions /  approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours  faithfully,
(Rudra Narayan Kar)
Chief General Manager-in-Charge