(30 kb)
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) into a Small Scale Industrial Undertakings (SSI) / Micro & Small Enterprises (MSE) and in Industrial Undertaking manufacturing items reserved for SSI/MSE
RBI/2013-14/498
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.107
February 20, 2014
To
All Category – I Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam / Sir,
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) into a Small Scale Industrial  Undertakings (SSI) / Micro & Small Enterprises (MSE) and in Industrial  Undertaking manufacturing items reserved  for SSI/MSE
Attention  of Authorised Dealer Category – I (AD Category-I) banks is invited to Schedule  1 of the Foreign Exchange Management (Transfer or Issue of Security by a Person  Resident outside India) Regulations, 2000 notified by the Reserve Bank vide
Notification No. FEMA. 20/2000-RB dated 3rd May 2000
, as amended from time to  time.
2.  In terms of the Schedule 1 of the Notification, ibid, an Indian company which  is a small scale industrial unit and which is not engaged in any activity or in  manufacture of items included in Annex A, may issue shares or convertible  debentures to a person resident outside India, to the extent of 24% of its paid  -up capital provided that such company may issue shares in excess of 24% of its  capital if:
(a) it has given up its small scale  status,
(b) it is not engaged or does not propose to  engage in manufacture of items reserved for small scale sector, and
(c) it complies with the ceilings specified  in Annex B to Schedule I of the Notification.
3.  With the promulgation of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development  (MSMED) Act, 2006, the extant policy for foreign direct investment (FDI) in Small  Scale Industrial unit and in a company which has de-registered its small scale industry  status and is not engaged or does not propose to engage in manufacture of items  reserved for small scale sector, has since been reviewed and it has been  decided that;
a company which is reckoned as  Micro and Small Enterprises (MSE) (earlier Small Scale Industries) in terms of  MSMED Act, 2006 and not engaged in any activity/sector mentioned in Annex A to  schedule 1 to the Notification, ibid  may  issue shares or convertible debentures to a person resident outside India,  subject to the limits prescribed in Annex B to schedule 1, in accordance with  the entry routes specified therein and the provision of Foreign Direct  Investment Policy, as notified by the  Ministry of Commerce & Industry, Government of India, from time to time.
any Industrial undertaking,  with or without FDI, which is not an MSE, having an industrial license under  the provisions of the Industries (Development & Regulation) Act, 1951 for  manufacturing items reserved for manufacture in the MSE sector may issue shares  in excess of 24 per cent of its paid up capital with prior approval of the  Foreign Investment Promotion Board of the Government of India.
4. Further, in terms of the provisions of MSMED Act, (i) in the  case of the enterprises engaged in the manufacture or production of  goods pertaining to any industry specified in the first schedule to the Industries  (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, a micro  enterprise means where the investment in plant and machinery does not exceed  twenty five lakh rupees; a small  enterprise means where the investment in plant and machinery is more than  twenty five lakh rupees but does not exceed five crore rupees; (ii) in the case  of the enterprises engaged in providing or rendering services, a micro enterprise means where the investment in equipment does not  exceed ten lakh rupees; a small  enterprise means where the investment in equipment is more than ten lakh rupees but does not  exceed two crore rupees.
5.
Copy of Press Note No. 6(2009) dated September 4, 2009
issued by Department of  Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP), Ministry of Commerce & Industry,  Government of India in this regard is enclosed.
6. AD Category - I banks may bring the contents  of the circular to the notice of their customers/constituents concerned.
7. Reserve Bank has  since amended the Regulations and notified vide
Notification No. FEMA. 230/2012-RB  dated May 29, 2012
, notified vide. G.S.R. No.797(E) dated October 30, 2012 read  with Corrigendum dated September 10, 2013 notified vide. G.S.R. No.624(E) dated  September 12, 2013 .
8.  The directions contained in this circular have been issued under sections 10(4)  and 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and are  without prejudice to permissions / approvals, if any, required under any other  law.
Yours faithfully,
(Rudra Narayan Kar)
Chief General Manager In-Charge