(93 kb)
Know Your Customer (KYC) Norms /Anti-Money Laundering (AML) Standards/ Combating of Financing of Terrorism (CFT)/Obligation of banks under Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002 –Recognising E-Aadhaar as an ‘Officially Valid Document’ under PML Rules
RBI/2013-14/510
DBOD.AML.BC.No. 100/14.01.001/2013-14
March 4,  2014
The Chairpersons/CEOs of  all Scheduled Commercial Banks
(Excluding RRBs)/Local Area Banks /  All India  Financial Institutions
Madam / Dear Sir,
Know Your  Customer (KYC) Norms /Anti-Money Laundering (AML) Standards/ Combating of  Financing of Terrorism (CFT)/Obligation of banks under Prevention of Money  Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002 –Recognising E-Aadhaar as an ‘Officially Valid  Document’ under PML Rules
Please refer to
paragraph  2.6 (B)
(a) of our Master Circular DBOD.AML.BC. No. 24/14.01.001/ 2013-14  dated July 1, 2013 on Know Your Customer (KYC) Norms / Anti-Money Laundering  (AML) Standards/Combating of Financing of Terrorism (CFT)/Obligation of banks  under PMLA, 2002 which states that letter issued by the Unique Identification  Authority of India (UIDAI) containing details of name, address and Aadhaar  number may be accepted as an ‘Officially Valid Document’. Further in terms of  paragraph 2.6 (B) (d) of the Master Circular it has been advised to banks that,  while opening accounts based on Aadhaar, if the address provided by the account  holder is the same as that on Aadhaar letter, it may be accepted as a proof of  both identity and address.
2. In this connection, a reference may  be made to our
circular  DBOD.AML.BC. No. 44/14.01.001/2013-14 dated September 2, 2013
,  wherein, a decision to accept  e-KYC service as a valid process for KYC verification under Prevention of Money  Laundering (Maintenance of Records) Rules, 2005 was advised. It was further  advised that, the information containing demographic details and photographs  made available from UIDAI as a result of e-KYC process (“which is in an  electronic form and accessible so as to be usable for a subsequent reference”)  may be treated as an ‘Officially Valid Document’ under PML Rules.
3. In this regard, it is clarified that, banks may accept e-Aadhaar  downloaded from UIDAI website as an officially valid document subject to the  following:
a) If the prospective customer knows only his/her  Aadhaar number, the bank may print the prospective customer’s e-Aadhaar letter  in the bank directly from the UIDAI portal; or adopt e-KYC procedure as  mentioned in the circular referred in paragraph 2 above.
b) If the prospective customer carries a copy of  the e-Aadhaar downloaded elsewhere, the bank may print the prospective  customer’s e-Aadhaar letter in the bank directly from the UIDAI portal; or adopt e-KYC procedure as mentioned in  the circular referred in paragraph 2 above; or confirm identity and address of  the resident through simple authentication service of UIDAI.
4. Physical Aadhaar card/letter issued by  UIDAI containing  details of name, address and Aadhaar number received through post and e-KYC process mentioned in the circular referred in paragraph 2  above would  continue to be accepted as an ‘Officially Valid Document’.
5. Banks may revise their KYC policy in  the light of the above instructions and ensure strict adherence to the same.
Yours faithfully,
(Prakash Chandra Sahoo)
Chief General Manager