(19 kb)
Risk Management and Inter Bank Dealings
RBI/2013-14/540
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.114
March 27, 2014
To
All Category – I Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam / Sir,
Risk  Management and Inter Bank Dealings
Attention  of Authorised Dealers Category-I (AD Category-I) banks is invited to the  Foreign Exchange Management (Foreign Exchange Derivative Contracts)  Regulations, 2000 dated May 3, 2000 (
Notification No. FEMA/25/RB-2000 dated May  3, 2000
) as amended from time to time and
A.P. (DIR Series) circular no. 58  dated December 15, 2011
.
2.  Under extant guidelines relating to hedging  of currency risk of probable exposures based on past performance by residents,
a. Exporters are allowed to hedge currency risk on the basis of a  declaration of an exposure up to an eligible limit computed as the average of  the previous three financial years’ (April to March) actual export turnover or  the previous year’s actual export turnover, whichever is higher.
b. Importers are allowed to hedge up to an eligible limit computed  as 25 percent of the average of the previous three financial years’ actual  import turnover or the previous year’s actual import turnover, whichever is  higher.
c. All forward contracts booked under this facility by  both exporters and importers are required to be on fully deliverable  basis.  In case of cancellation, exchange  gain, if any, should not be passed on to the customer.
3.  In order to provide greater operational flexibility, it has been decided to  relax the restriction at paragraph 2(c) above.   Henceforth, contracts booked up to 75 percent of the eligible limit  mentioned at paragraph 2(a) and 2(b) above may be cancelled with the  exporter/importer bearing/being entitled to the loss or gain as the case may  be.  Contracts booked in excess of 75  percent of the eligible limit mentioned at paragraph 2(a) and 2(b) above shall  be on a deliverable basis and cannot be cancelled, implying that in the event  of cancellation, the exporter/importer shall have to bear the loss but will not  be entitled to receive the gain.
4.  AD Category-I banks may bring the contents of this circular to the notice of  their constituents and customers.
5.  The directions contained in this circular have been issued under Sections 10(4)  and 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and are  without prejudice to permissions/ approvals, if any, required under any other  law.
Yours faithfully
(Rudra Narayan Kar)
Chief General Manager-In-Charge