(123 kb)
Guidelines on Sale of Financial Assets to Securitisation Company/Reconstruction Company (SC/RC) by Multi State Urban Cooperative Banks
RBI/2013-14/543
UBD.BPD.(PCB).Cir.No.53/13.05.000/2013-14
March 28, 2014
The Chief Executive Officers of
All Multi-State  Co-operative Banks
Dear Sir/Madam,
Guidelines on Sale  of Financial Assets to Securitisation Company/
Reconstruction Company (SC/RC) by Multi   State Urban Cooperative  Banks
Please refer to para  13.2 of
Master Circular UBD.BPD(PCB).MC.No.12/ 16.20.000/2013-14  dated July 1, 2013
on Investments by UCBs.
2. It has been decided to permit Urban  Cooperative Banks registered under the
Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002
to invest in Security Receipts issued by SC/RC in  respect of financial assets sold by them to the SC/RC.
However, UCBs  must ensure that there is no order issued by a Court of competent jurisdiction  restricting them from entering into such transactions
.
3. A set of guidelines to be followed by Multi-State Co-operative  Banks on sale of Financial  Assets to SC/RC has been formulated and furnished in the
Annex
. The guidelines may  be placed before the bank's Board and appropriate steps taken for their  implementation.
Yours faithfully,
(A. K. Bera)
Principal Chief General  Manager
Encl:
Annex
Annex
Scope
These guidelines  would be applicable to sale of financial assets enumerated in paragraph 3  below, by Multi-State Co-operative Banks, for asset  reconstruction/ securitisation under the Securitisation and Reconstruction of  Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act , 2002 (SARFAESI Act).
Structure
2. The guidelines  to be followed by Multi-State Co-operative Banks while selling  their financial assets to SC/RC under the Act ibid and investing in bonds /  debentures / security receipts offered by the SC/RC are given below. The  prudential guidelines have been grouped under the following headings:
i) Financial  assets which can be sold.
ii) Procedure  for sale of financial assets of Multi-State  Co-operative Banks to SC/RC, including valuation and pricing aspects.
iii) Prudential norms, in the following areas,  for Multi-State Co-operative  Banks for sale of their financial assets to SC/RC and  for investing in bonds/ debentures / security receipts and any other securities  offered by the SC/RC as compensation consequent upon sale of financial assets:
Provisioning / Valuation norms
Capital adequacy norms
Exposure norms
iv) Disclosure  requirements
3. Financial assets  which can be sold
A financial asset may be sold to the SC/RC by Multi-State Co-operative Banks where the asset is:
i) A Non Performing Asset, including a non-performing bond /debenture, and
ii) A Standard Asset where:
the asset is under  consortium/multiple banking arrangements with Commercial Banks and Multi State  Cooperative Banks as member banks,
at least 75% by value of  the asset is classified as non-performing asset in  the books of other banks, and
at least 75% (by value)  of the banks who are under the consortium / multiple banking arrangements agree  to the sale of the asset to SC / RC.
4. Procedure for sale of  financial assets of Multi-State  Co-operative Banks to SC/RC, including  valuation and pricing aspects
(a) The SARFAESI Act, 2002 allows acquisition of financial assets by SC/ RC from Multi-State Co-operative Bank on such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon  between them. This provides for sale of the financial assets on 'without  recourse' basis, i.e., with the entire credit risk associated with the  financial assets being transferred to SC/ RC, as well as on 'with recourse'  basis, i.e., subject to unrealized part of the asset reverting to the seller bank.  Multi-State Co-operative Banks are, however, directed to ensure that the effect of the  sale of the financial assets should be such that the asset is taken off from the  books of the bank and after the sale there should not be any known  liability devolving on the bank.
(b) Banks which  propose to sell their financial assets to SC/RC should ensure that the sale is  conducted in a prudent manner in accordance with the policy approved by the  Board. The Board shall lay down policies and guidelines covering,
inter alia
,
i) Financial assets to be sold;
ii) Norms  and procedure for sale of such financial assets;
iii) Valuation  procedure to be followed to ensure that the realisable value of financial  assets is reasonably estimated;
iv) Delegation of powers of various  functionaries for taking decision on the sale of the financial assets; etc.
(c) Banks should ensure that subsequent to sale of the financial assets to SC/RC,  they do not assume any operational, legal or any other type of risks relating  to the financial assets sold.
(d) (i) Each bank will make its own assessment of the value offered by  the SC / RC for the financial asset and decide whether to accept or reject the  offer.
(ii) In the case of  consortium / multiple banking arrangements with other Multi-State Cooperative  Banks and Commercial Banks, if 75% (by value) of the banks decide to accept the  offer, the remaining banks will be obligated to accept the offer.
(iii) Under  no circumstances, can a transfer to the SC/RC be made at a contingent price  whereby in the event of shortfall in the realization by the SC/RC, the banks  would have to bear a part of the shortfall.
(e) Banks may receive cash or bonds or debentures as sale  consideration for the financial assets sold to SC/RC.
(f) Bonds / debentures received by banks as  sale consideration towards sale of financial assets to SC/RC will be classified  as investments in the books of banks.
(g) Banks may also invest in security  receipts or other bonds / debentures issued by SC/RC in respect of financial  assets sold by them to SC/RC. These securities will also be classified as  investments in the books of banks.
(h) In cases  of specific financial assets, where it is considered necessary, banks may enter  into agreement with SC/RC to share, in an agreed proportion, any surplus  realised by SC/RC on the eventual realisation of the concerned asset. In such  cases the terms of sale should provide for a report from the SC/RC to the bank  on the value realised from the asset. No credit for the expected profit will be  taken by banks until the profit materializes on actual sale.
5. Prudential norms for banks for the sale transactions
(A)
Provisioning  / valuation norms
(a) (i) When a  bank sells its financial assets to SC/RC, on transfer the  same will be removed from its books.
(ii) If  the sale to SC/RC is at a price below the net book value (NBV) (i.e., book  value less provisions held), the shortfall should be debited to the profit and  loss account of that year.
(iii) If the sale is for a value higher than the NBV, the excess provision will not  be reversed but will be utilized to meet the shortfall / loss on account of  sale of other financial assets to SC/RC.
(iv) When banks invest in the security receipts  issued by SC/RC in respect of the financial assets sold by them to the SC/RC,  the sale shall be recognised in books of the banks at the lower of:
the  redemption value of the security receipts, and
the  NBV of the financial asset.
The above investment should be carried in the books of the  bank / FI at the price as determined above until its sale or realization, and  on such sale or realization, the loss or gain must be dealt with in the same  manner as at (ii) and (iii) above
(b) The securities (bonds and debentures) offered by SC/RC should satisfy the  following conditions:
(i) The  securities must not have a term in excess of six years.
(ii) The  securities must carry a rate of interest which is not lower than 1.5% above the  ‘Bank Rate’ in force at the time of issue.
(iii) The  securities must be secured by an appropriate charge on the assets transferred.
(iv) The  securities must provide for part or full prepayment in the event the SC/RC  sells the asset securing the security before the maturity date of the security.
(v) The  commitment of the SC/RC to redeem the securities must be unconditional and not  linked to the realization of the assets.
(vi) Whenever the security is transferred to any  other party, notice of transfer should be issued to the SC/RC.
(c)
Investment in debentures / bonds / security receipts issued by SC / RC
All instruments received by banks from SC/RC as sale  consideration for financial assets sold to them and also other instruments  issued by SC/RC in which banks invest will be in the nature of non SLR  securities. Accordingly, the valuation, classification and other norms  applicable to investment in non-SLR instruments prescribed by RBI from time to  time would be applicable to bank's investment in debentures / bonds / security  receipts issued by SC/RC. However, if any of the above instruments issued by  SC/RC is limited to the actual realisation of the financial assets assigned to  the instruments in the concerned scheme, the bank shall reckon the Net Asset  Value (NAV), obtained from SC/RC from time to time, for valuation of such  investments
(B)
Capital  Adequacy
For the purpose of capital adequacy, banks should assign  risk weights as under to the investments in debentures / bonds / SRs issued by  SC / RC and held by banks as investment:
i) Risk weight for credit risk:     100%.
ii) Risk  weight for market risk:   2.5%
Applicable risk weight =     (i) + (ii)
(C)
Exposure  Norms
Banks' investments  in debentures/ bonds/ SRs issued by an SC/RC will constitute exposure on the  SC/RC. As there are a few SC/RC, banks' exposure on SC/RC through their  investments in debentures / bonds / SRs issued by the SC/RC may go beyond their  prudential exposure ceiling. In view of the extra ordinary nature of event,  banks will be allowed, in the initial years, to exceed prudential exposure  ceiling on a case-to-case basis.
6. Disclosure Requirements
Banks, which sell  their financial assets to an SC/RC, shall be required to make the following  disclosures in the Notes on Accounts to their Balance sheets:
Details of  financial assets sold during the year to SC/RC for Asset Reconstruction
a) No. of accounts
b) Aggregate value (net of provisions) of accounts sold to SC/RC
c) Aggregate consideration
d) Additional consideration realized in respect of accounts transferred in earlier  years
e) Aggregate gain / loss over net book value.
7. Related Issues
(a) SC/RC will also take over financial assets which cannot be revived and which, therefore,  will have to be disposed of on a realisation basis. Normally the SC/RC will not  take over these assets but act as an agent for recovery for which it will  charge a fee.
(b) Where the assets fall in the above  category, the assets will not be removed from the books of the bank but  realisations as and when received will be credited to the asset account.  Provisioning for the asset will continue to be made by the bank in the normal  course.