(41 kb)
Gold (Metal) Loans (GMLs)
RBI/2013-14/551
DBOD.No.IBD.BC.104/23.67.001/2013-14
April 2, 2014
All Scheduled Commercial Banks
(excluding RRBs)
Dear Sir / Madam
Gold (Metal) Loans (GMLs)
Please refer to our
circular DBOD.No.IBD.BC.33/23.67.001/2005-06  dated September 5, 2005
and
circular DBOD.No.IBD.BC. 71/23.67.001/2006-07 dated  April 3, 2007
wherein banks had been  advised to ensure the end use of gold loans and also to  lay down appropriate risk management and lending policy to obviate the  possibility of frauds in this area.
2. It has come to our  notice that some GML providing banks are extending Gold Metal  Loans mainly relying on stand-by LC/BG  issued by other banks, without carrying out detailed credit appraisal. If the  sales proceeds are not routed through GML providing banks, they are not able to  monitor end use of the gold lent. Further, banks issuing stand-by LC/BG often do not carry out  proper credit appraisal of the borrowers. Lack of proper monitoring mechanism  and not ensuring end use of GML has resulted in certain  instances of frauds/ misuse related to GML by certain unscrupulous jewellers. In  order to mitigate the risk of frauds/misuse of the scheme by the GML borrowers,  it is advised that the stand-by LC/BG issuing bank and the GML providing banks should  keep the following additional guidelines in view:
i. Stand-by LC/BG issuing bank  should carry out rigorous credit appraisal exercise and treat stand-by LC/BG  limit (Non-fund based limit) at par with the fund based limit. Similarly, bank  disbursing GML should carry out independent credit appraisal of the borrower.  It should not rely solely on stand-by LC/BG issued by other banks.
ii. Stand-by LC/BG issuing bank  and bank disbursing GML while assessing the credit requirement of the borrower  may, among others, take into account the following aspects:
Track record of  the borrower,
Trade cycle of the  manufacturing activity,
Credit worthiness  of the borrower,
Collateral security offered by the borrower, etc.
iii. The manufacturer of the  gold jewellery availing GML, irrespective of whether through stand-by LC/BG  issued by another bank or directly from a nominated bank, should have good  credentials and standing in the market. This should be established by inputs  from the market as well as from other sources including from the Credit  Information Companies.
iv. In the case of GML against  revolving stand-by LC/BG, i.e., where the original loan limit is restored after  repayment of previous loan without any further reference to the stand-by LC/BG  issuing bank, both the banks, i.e., GML providing bank and the stand-by LC/BG  issuing bank may evolve a mechanism to carefully monitor the borrowing  arrangement. In such cases GML providing bank may seek confirmation of stand-by  LC/BG issuing bank before restoring the loan limit.  Existing guidelines in respect of verifying  the genuineness of the guarantee with the issuing bank as provided in the Master  Circular on Guarantees and Co-acceptances (
DBOD.No.Dir.BC.12/13.03.00/2013-14 dated July 1, 2013
) may be followed by the banks in this  regard.
v. Bank disbursing GML should  open current account of the borrower with the consent of stand-by LC/BG issuing  bank so that funds can be arranged by the borrower in the account for monthly  servicing of interest and repayment of loan on due date.
vi. The GML providing bank may  obtain all relevant information from the borrower viz., daily sales/stock  position, deposit of sales proceeds etc., at stipulated intervals and there  should be proper sharing of the above information between GML providing bank  and stand-by LC/BG issuing bank.
vii. Inspection of stocks,  quality check of the gold stock, verification of insurance cover, etc, may be  undertaken jointly or on rotation basis by the GML providing bank and stand-by  LC/BG issuing bank.
viii. In case GML is given by the  nominated bank to its own existing customers, gold metal loans under the scheme  may be carved out within the credit limit sanctioned by the bank. In case of  new borrowers, the gold metal loan limit may be fixed after carrying out a  detailed credit appraisal and due diligence.
ix. GML can be availed of only  by gold jewellers who are themselves manufacturers of gold jewellery. The  jewellers cannot sell the gold borrowed under GML scheme to any other party for  manufacture of jewellery.
3. Banks may adopt a suitable  Board approved policy in this regard keeping in view the above guidelines and  the regulations issued by the Foreign Exchange Department, of the RBI related  to import of gold.
4. These instructions will  come into force with immediate effect.
Yours faithfully
(Rajesh Verma)
Chief General Manager