(26 kb)
Foreign investment in India in Government Securities
RBI/2013-14/556
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular  No.118
April 07, 2014
To
All Category – I Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam / Sir,
Foreign investment in India in  Government Securities
Please refer to paragraph 24  of first bi-monthly Monetary Policy statement, 2014-15.
2. Attention of AD Category-I banks is invited  to
A.P.(DIR Series) Circular No.94 dated April  1, 2013
read with
A.P.(DIR Series) Circular No.111 dated June  12, 2013
and
A.P.(DIR Series) Circular No.112 dated March  25, 2014
, in terms of which the present limit for investment in  Government Securities by SEBI registered FIIs, QFIs, long term investors and  FPIs registered in accordance with SEBI guidelines stands at USD 30 billion.  Out of the above limit, a sub-limit of USD 5.5 billion is available for  investment in Treasury Bills (T-bills). Further, in terms of
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No.99 dated January 29, 2014
, a sub-limit of USD 10  billion for investment in Government dated securities within the total limit of  USD 30 billion is available to long term investors registered with SEBI – viz. Sovereign  Wealth Funds (SWFs), Multilateral Agencies, Pension/ Insurance/ Endowment Funds  and foreign Central Banks.
3. On a review, to encourage  longer term flows, it has now been decided that foreign investment by all  eligible investors including RFPIs shall henceforth be permitted only in  Government dated securities having residual maturity of one year and above and  existing investments in T-bills and Government dated securities of less than  one year residual maturity shall be allowed to taper off on maturity/ sale.
The revised position in respect of the investment limit in Government dated  securities is given below:
Instrument/s
Limit
Eligible Investors
Remarks
Government dated securities    – Securities having residual maturity of one year and above.
USD 30 billion
RFPIs (including existing FIIs and QFIs) and Long    term investors registered with SEBI – SWFs, Multilateral Agencies, Pension/  Insurance / Endowment Funds and foreign Central Banks.
Existing investment in T-bills and Government    dated securities of less than one year residual maturity shall be allowed to    taper off on maturity/sale.
No fresh investment in T-bills and Government    dated securities of less than one year residual maturity allowed.
4. Necessary operational guidelines in this regard  will be issued by SEBI.
5. All  other existing conditions for investment in Government securities remain  unchanged.
6. AD  Category – I banks may bring the contents of this circular to the notice of  their constituents and customers concerned.
7. The directions contained in this circular have been  issued under sections 10(4) and 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act,  1999 (42 of 1999) and are without prejudice to permissions / approvals, if any,  required under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(Rudra Narayan Kar)
Chief General Manager-in-Charge