(198 kb)
Risk Management & Inter-Bank Dealings: Booking of Forward Contracts - Liberalisation
RBI/2013-14/557
A.P. (DIR Series)  Circular No. 119
April 07, 2014
To,
All Authorised Dealer  Category – I banks
Madam / Sir,
Risk Management &  Inter-Bank Dealings:
Booking of Forward  Contracts - Liberalisation
Please refer to
paragraph  23
of the first Bi-Monthly Monetary Policy Statement, 2014-15 wherein,  inter alia, it has been proposed to allow all resident individuals, firms and  companies with actual foreign exchange exposures to book foreign exchange  derivative contracts up to US$ 250,000 on declaration, subject to certain  conditions.
2. Attention of  Authorised Dealer Category-I (AD Category-I) banks is invited to the Foreign  Exchange Management (Foreign Exchange Derivative Contracts) Regulations, 2000  dated May 3, 2000 (
Notification  No.FEMA.25/RB-2000 dated May 3, 2000
) as amended from time to time and
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No.15 dated October 29, 2007
regarding liberalisation  in respect of booking of forward contracts, in terms of which resident  individuals, to manage/ hedge their foreign exchange exposures arising out of  actual or anticipated remittances, both inward and outward, are allowed to book  forward contracts, without production of underlying  documents, up to a limit of US$ 100,000 based on self-declaration.
3. With a view to  further liberalising the existing facilities, it has now been decided to allow  all resident individuals, firms and companies, who have actual or anticipated  foreign exchange exposures to book foreign exchange forward contracts up to US$  250,000 on the basis of a simple declaration without any requirement of further  documentation. The existing facilities in terms of the aforementioned circular  for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) having direct and/ or indirect  exposures to foreign exchange risk permitting them to book/ cancel/ roll over  forward contracts without production of underlying documents to manage their  exposures effectively subject to conditions specified therein shall remain  unchanged.
4. The revised  reporting format is provided in
Annexes I
and
II
of this circular. All other  conditions including tenor of the contracts as laid down in A.P. (DIR Series)  Circular No.15 dated October 29, 2007 will apply mutatis mutandis.
5. AD Category –  I banks may bring the contents of this circular to the notice of their  constituents and customers concerned.
6. The directions  contained in this circular have been issued under Section 10(4) and Section  11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and are without  prejudice to permissions/approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(Rudra Narayan Kar)
Chief General Manager- in- Charge
Annex I
[Annex  to A. P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 119 dated April 07, 2014]
Application cum Declaration for booking of forward  contracts up to
US$ 250,000 by  Resident Individuals, Firms and Companies
(To be completed by the  applicant)
I. Details of the applicant
a. Name …………………………..
b. Address…………………………
c. Account No……………………..
d. PAN No………………………….
II. Details of the foreign exchange forward  contracts required
1. Amount (Specify currency  pair) ………………………………
2. Tenor ………………………………………………….
III. Notional value of forward contracts  outstanding as on date ……….
IV. Details of actual / anticipated remittances
1. Amount :
2. Remittance Schedule :
3. Purpose :
Declaration
I/We,  ………………. …………(Name of the applicant), hereby declare that the total amount of  foreign exchange forward contracts booked with the ---------------(designated  branch) of ------------------(bank) in India is within the limit of US$  250,000/- (US Dollar Two lakh and Fifty Thousand only) and certify that the  forward contracts are meant for undertaking permitted current and / or capital  account transactions. I/We also certify that I have not booked foreign exchange  forward contracts with any other bank / branch. I/We have understood the risks  inherent in booking of foreign exchange forward contracts.
Signature of the applicant
(Name)
Place:
Date:
Certificate by the Authorised  Dealer Category – I bank
This is to  certify that the customer …………(Name of the applicant) having PAN No. ……. has  been maintaining an account ……..(no.) with us since ……..* We certify that the  customer meets the AML / KYC guidelines laid down by RBI and confirm having  carried out requisite suitability and appropriateness test.
Name and  designation of the authorised official:
Place:
Signature:
Date: Stamp  and seal
* month / year
Annex II
[Annex to A. P. (DIR Series) Circular No.119 dated April 07, 2014]
Statement – Details of Forward contracts booked and  cancelled under Self-declaration
For the Quarter ended–
Category
Forward Contracts Booked
Forward Contracts Cancelled
During the Quarter
Cumulative total-Year to Date
During the Quarter
Cumulative total-Year to Date
SMEs
Individuals
Firms / Companies
Name of the AD Category-I bank:
Signature of the Authorised Officials:
Date:
Stamp: