(25 kb)
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in India – Reporting mechanism for transfer of equity shares/ fully and mandatorily convertible preference shares/ fully and mandatorily convertible debentures
RBI/2013-14/577
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.127
May 2, 2014
To
All Category – I Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam/ Sir,
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in India –
Reporting mechanism for transfer of equity  shares/ fully and mandatorily
convertible preference shares/ fully and  mandatorily convertible debentures
Attention of Authorised Dealer Category – I (AD  Category – I) banks is invited to the following extant instructions:
in terms of A.P. (DIR Series)  Circular No. 38 dated September 6, 2013, a non-resident (NR) [including a Non  Resident Indian (NRI)], who has acquired and continues to hold control in an  Indian company in accordance with SEBI (Substantial Acquisition of shares and  Takeover) Regulations, has been permitted, under the FDI scheme, to acquire  shares of that company on a stock exchange in India through a registered  broker;
in terms of paragraph 4 of
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 63 dated April 22, 2009
the form FC-TRS should be  submitted to the AD Category – I bank within 60 days from the date of receipt  of the amount of consideration. The onus of submission of the form FC-TRS  within the given timeframe is cast upon the transferor / transferee, whoever is  resident in India.  Further, as per extant practice, the AD  Category – I bank seeks approval from the Reserve Bank of India, Central Office  before certifying the form FC-TRS received by them beyond the prescribed period  of 60 days;
in  terms of paragraph 6.4 of annex to
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 16 dated October 4, 2004
, the IBD/FED or the  nodal office of the bank has to submit a consolidated monthly statement in  respect of all the transactions reported by the branches together with copies  of the FC-TRS forms received from the branches to Foreign Exchange Department,  Reserve Bank of India, Foreign Investment Division, Central Office, Mumbai in a  soft copy (in MS- Excel)
2. On a review, it has now been decided:
to rationalise the existing  procedure, in cases where the NR investor including an NRI acquires shares on  the stock exchanges in terms of the aforesaid
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 38 dated September 6, 2013
, the investee company  would have to file form FC-TRS with the AD Category-I bank.
In order to facilitate operational  convenience, it has been decided that the AD Category-I bank may approach  Regional Office concerned of Reserve Bank of India, Foreign Exchange Department  to regularize the delay in submission of form FC-TRS, beyond the prescribed  period of 60 days and in all other cases, form FC-TRS shall continue to be  scrutinised at AD bank level as per extant practice.
The  AD banks shall continue to comply with the consolidated reporting requirement  as stipulated in terms of Para 6.4 of A. P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 16 dated  October 4, 2004.
3. These directions will become operative from the date of this circular.
4. All the other terms and conditions of the  A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 16 dated October 4, 2004, A.P. (DIR Series)  Circular No. 63 dated April 22, 2009 and A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 38  dated September 6, 2013 shall remain unchanged.
5. Authorised Dealers may bring the contents of  this circular to the notice of their constituents and customers concerned.
6. The directions  contained in this circular have been issued under sections 10(4) and 11(1) of  the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and is without prejudice  to permissions / approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(Rudra  Narayan Kar)
Chief  General Manager-in-Charge