(85 kb)
Opening of Bank Accounts in the Names of Minors
RBI/2013-14/581
DBOD.No.Leg.BC.108/09.07.005/2013-14
May 6, 2014
All Scheduled Commercial Banks
(excluding RRBs)
Dear Sir/Madam,
Opening of Bank Accounts in the Names of Minors
Please refer to our
circular DBOD.No.Leg.BC.158/C.90(H)-76 dated December 29, 1976
wherein banks were advised to allow minors’ accounts (fixed and savings deposit accounts) with mothers as guardians to be opened subject to safeguards in allowing operations in such accounts by ensuring that the minors’ accounts opened with guardian are not allowed to be overdrawn and that these always remain in credit. Also, please refer to our
circular DBOD.No.Leg.BC.19/C.90(H)-89 dated September 8, 1989
extending the facility, of allowing opening of minors’ account with mothers as guardian, to Recurring Deposits.
2. Further, with a view to promote the objective of financial inclusion and also to bring uniformity among banks in opening and operating minors’ accounts, banks are advised as under:
A savings /fixed / recurring bank deposit account can be opened by a minor of any age through his/her natural or legally appointed guardian.
Minors above the age of 10 years may be allowed to open and operate savings bank accounts independently, if they so desire. Banks may, however, keeping in view their risk management systems, fix limits in terms of age and amount up to which minors may be allowed to operate the deposit accounts independently. They can also decide, in their own discretion, as to what minimum documents are required for opening of accounts by minors.
On attaining majority, the erstwhile minor should confirm the balance in his/her account and if the account is operated by the natural guardian / legal guardian, fresh operating instructions and specimen signature of erstwhile minor should be obtained and kept on record for all operational purposes.
3. Banks are free to offer additional banking facilities like internet banking, ATM/ debit card, cheque book facility etc., subject to the safeguards that minor accounts are not allowed to be overdrawn and that these always remain in credit.
Yours faithfully,
(Rajesh Verma)
Chief General Manager