(77 kb)
Operations of foreign branches and subsidiaries of the Indian banks – Compliance with statutory/regulatory/administrative prohibitions/restrictions
RBI/2013-14/588
DBOD.No.BP.BC.111/21.04.157/2013-14
May  12, 2014
All Scheduled Commercial Banks
(Excluding RRBs and LABs) &
All India Term-Lending & Refinancing Institutions
Madam / Sir,
Operations of foreign  branches and subsidiaries of the Indian banks –
Compliance  with statutory/regulatory/administrative prohibitions/restrictions
Please  refer to the
Circular  DBOD.No.BP.BC.89 /21.04.141/2008-09 dated December 1, 2008
on the captioned subject. In terms of paragraph  5 of the circular, if the foreign branches / foreign subsidiaries of the Indian  banks propose to handle structured financial products, banks are required to obtain  prior approval of the Reserve Bank for the purpose.
2. On  a review, it has been decided that if foreign branches / subsidiaries of Indian banks propose to offer structured  financial and derivative products that are not specifically permitted by the Reserve  Bank in the domestic market, they may do so only at the established financial  centers outside India like New York, London, Singapore, Hong Kong, Frankfurt,  Dubai, etc. Banks should ensure that their foreign branches / subsidiaries,  dealing with such products in foreign jurisdictions, have adequate knowledge,  understanding, and risk management capability for handling such products. At  other centers, banks may offer only those products that are specifically  permitted in India.
3.  The products that the foreign branches /  subsidiaries of Indian banks offer at overseas location should be in compliance  with host country regulations, with prior approval from  their Board and appropriate authority in these foreign jurisdictions. Banks  should continue to adhere to more  stringent among the host and home regulations in respect of these products. In particular, banks should ensure that the suitability and  appropriateness policy is strictly adhered to as mandated by the Reserve Bank  and the host regulators.
4. It  is reiterated that for undertaking activities by Indian banks’ branches and  subsidiaries abroad which are not permitted under the Banking Regulations Act,  1949 / respective Statute of the Public Sector Banks, banks should obtain from the  RBI / Government of India necessary permission under Section 6 (1) (m) or 19 (1)  (c) of the Banking Regulations Act, 1949, as the case may be, for undertaking  such activities.
Yours  faithfully,
(Rajesh  Verma)
Chief General  Manager