(64 kb)
External Commercial Borrowings (ECB) from Foreign Equity Holder - Simplification of Procedure
RBI/2013-14/594
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.130
May 16, 2014
To
All Category – I  Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam/Sir,
External Commercial  Borrowings (ECB) from Foreign Equity Holder - Simplification of Procedure
Attention  of Authorised Dealer Category – I (AD Category – I) banks is invited to the
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 05 dated August 01, 2005
as amended from time to  time relating to the External Commercial Borrowings (ECB). Attention is also  invited to
A. P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 11 dated September 07, 2011
,
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 29 dated September 26, 2011
, and
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 31 dated September 04, 2013
.
2. As per the extant ECB policy, ECBs from direct foreign equity holders (FEHs) are considered both  under the automatic and the approval routes, as the case may be. ECBs from  indirect equity holders and group companies and ECBs from direct FEH for  general corporate purpose are, however, considered under the approval route.  Further, any request for change of the  ECB lender in case of FEH requires RBI’s approval.
3.  As a measure of simplification of the existing procedure, it has been decided  to delegate powers to AD banks to approve the following cases under the  automatic route:
Proposals for raising ECB by  companies belonging to manufacturing, infrastructure, hotels, hospitals and  software sectors from indirect equity holders and group companies.
Proposals for raising ECB for companies in miscellaneous  services from direct / indirect equity holders and group companies. Miscellaneous services mean companies engaged in training activities  (but not educational institutes), research and development activities and  companies supporting infrastructure sector. Companies doing trading business,  companies providing logistics services, financial services and consultancy  services are, however, not covered under the facility.
Proposals for raising ECB by  companies belonging to manufacturing, infrastructure, hotels, hospitals and  software sectors for general corporate purpose.ECB for  general corporate purpose (which includes working capital financing) is,  however, permitted only from direct equity holder.
Proposals involving change of  lender when the ECB is from FEH – direct / indirect equity holders and group  company.
4.  All other terms and conditions stipulated in the relative circulars shall  continue to be applicable.
5.  Other aspects of the ECB policy such as eligible borrower, recognised lender,  permitted end-use, amount of ECB, all-in-cost, average maturity period,  pre-payment, ECB liability:equity ratio, refinance of existing ECB, reporting  arrangements, etc. shall remain  unchanged.
6.  These changes will come into force with immediate effect.
7.  AD Category - I banks may bring the contents of this circular to the notice of  their constituents and customers.
8. The directions contained  in this circular have been issued under sections 10(4) and 11(1) of the Foreign  Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and are without prejudice to  permissions / approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(Rudra  Narayan Kar)
Chief General Manager-in-Charge