(121 kb)
Export of Goods - Long Term Export Advances
RBI/2013-14/597
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.132
May 21, 2014
To
All Category – I Authorised Dealer  Banks
Madam/ Sir,
Export of Goods - Long Term Export Advances
Attention of  Authorised Dealer Category - I (AD Category I) banks is invited to the  sub-regulation (2) of Regulation 16 of the Foreign Exchange Management (Export  of Goods and Services) Regulations, 2000, notified vide
Notification  No.FEMA.23/RB- 2000, dated 3rd May 2000
, as amended from time to time, in  terms of which prior approval of the Reserve Bank is required to be obtained by  an exporter for receipt of advance where the export agreement provides for  shipment of goods extending beyond the period of one year from the date of  receipt of advance payment. Further, in terms of
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No.81 dated February 21, 2012
AD Category- I banks  have been permitted to allow exporters to receive advance payment for export of  goods which would take more than one year to manufacture and ship and where the  'export agreement' provides for the same.
2. In view of requests received from  exporters, it has been decided to permit AD Category- I banks to allow  exporters having a minimum of three years’ satisfactory track record to receive  long term export advance up to a maximum tenor of 10 years to be utilized for  execution of long term supply contracts for export of goods subject to the  conditions as under:
a) Firm irrevocable supply orders should  be in place. The contract with the overseas party /buyer should be vetted and  clearly specify the nature, amount and delivery timelines of products over the years and penalty in case of  non- performance or contract cancellation. Product pricing should be in  consonance with prevailing international prices.
b) Company should have capacity, systems and  processes in place to ensure that the orders over the duration of the said  tenure can actually be executed.
c) The facility is to be provided only to those  entities, who have not come under the adverse notice of Enforcement Directorate  or any such regulatory agency or have not been caution listed.
d) Such advances should be  adjusted through future exports.
e) The rate of interest payable, if any,  should not exceed LlBOR plus 200 basis 
points.
f) The documents should be routed through  one Authorized Dealer bank only.
g) Authorised Dealer bank should ensure  compliance with AML / KYC guidelines and also undertake due diligence for the  overseas buyer so as to ensure it has good standing / sound track record.
h) Such export advances shall not  be permitted to be used to liquidate Rupee loans, which are classified as NPA  as per the Reserve Bank of India  asset classification norms.
i) Double  financing for working capital for execution of export orders should be avoided.
j) Receipt of such advance of USD  100 million or more should be  immediately reported to the Trade Division, Foreign Exchange Department,  Reserve Bank of India, Central Office, 5th Floor, Amar Building,  Mumbai under copy to the concerned Regional Office of the Reserve Bank of India as per the format given in
Annex – I
.
3. In case Authorized Dealer banks are  required to issue bank guarantee (BG) / Stand by Letter of Credit (SBLC) for  export performance, the following guidelines may also be adhered to:
a) Issuance of BG / SBLC, being a  non-funded exposure, should be 
rigorously evaluated as any other credit proposal keeping in view, among others, prudential requirements based on board approved 
policy. Such facility will be extended only for guaranteeing export  performance.
b) BG / SBLC may be issued for a  term not exceeding two years at a time and further rollover of not more than  two years at a time may be allowed 
subject to satisfaction with relative export performance as per the contract.
c) BG / SBLC should cover only  the advance on reducing balance basis.
d) BG / SBLC issued from India in favour of overseas buyer should not be  discounted by the overseas branch / subsidiary of bank in India.
e) Authorised Dealer bank should  duly evaluate and monitor the progress 
made by the exporter on utilisation of the advance and submit an Annual  Progress Report to the Trade Division, Foreign Exchange Department, Reserve  Bank of India, Central Office, 5th Floor, Amar Building, Mumbai under copy to  the concerned Regional Office of the Reserve Bank of India in format as per
Annex - II
within a month from the  close of each financial year.
4.  AD Category - I banks may bring the  contents of this circular to the notice
 of their constituents and  customers concerned.
5.  The directions contained in this  circular have been issued under Sections 10(4) and 11 (1) of the Foreign  Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) 
 and are without prejudice  to permissions
I
approvals, if  any, required under any law.
Yours faithfully,
(C D Srinivasan)
Chief General Manager
ANNEX  I
Reporting  of Long term Advance of USD 100 million & more
Name and Address of  the Exporter:
PAN  of the exporter:
Name, address and  relationship with the overseas supplier from whom long term advance has been  availed of:
Company  review:
Nature of business
Number of years the party has been dealing    with the bank
Details of existing facilities with the    Bank
Export to total domestic sales ratio (last    three years average)
Details  of long term advance:
Total amount of contract/orders placed    & period
Total advance to be received
Date of receipt of Advance
Tenor
Rate of Interest, if any
Details of BG/SBLC issued, if any
Place:
Date:
Authorised Signatory:
Authorised Dealer Bank:
Address:
Seal:
ANNEX  II
Progress Report to be  submitted by Authorised Dealer Bank on utilization
of Long term export Advances
(For  the year ended March 31, …….)
Name and Address of  the Exporter:
Name and address of  the overseas supplier from whom long term advance has been availed of:
Name of the Regional  Office of Reserve Bank of India to which Report is being submitted:
Details  of utilization of long term export advance:
Total export advances received
Projected export performance for the year    ended 31.3…
Actual exports performed
Comments/ reasons for shortfall
Export outstanding as on 31.3…
Details of export advance used to adjust    the domestic loan, if any,
Details  of bank guarantee/SBLC issued:
Total amount for which BG has been issued
Whether invoked
Reasons for invocation
Place:
Date:
Authorised Signatory:
Authorised Dealer Bank:
Address:
Seal: