(250 kb)
Import of Gold by Nominated Banks / Agencies / Entities
RBI/2013-14/600
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.133
May 21, 2014
To
All Scheduled Commercial Banks which are  Authorized Dealers (ADs) in
Foreign  Exchange/ All Agencies nominated for import of gold
Madam/ Sir,
Import of Gold by Nominated Banks / Agencies / Entities
Attention of Authorised Persons is drawn to the  Reserve Bank's
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 25 dated August 14, 2013
; and  the subsequent circulars, on the captioned subject.
2. The Government of India  and Reserve Bank of India  has been receiving representations from the jewelers, bullion dealers, AD  banks, and trade bodies to rationalise the guidelines for import of gold.  Taking into account such representations and in consultation with the  Government of India, it has been decided to modify the guidelines for import of  Gold by the nominated banks / agencies / entities. These revised guidelines  which will come into force with immediate effect are as under:
3. Star  Trading Houses / Premier Trading Houses (STH/PTH) which are registered as  nominated agencies by the Director General of Foreign Trade (DGFT) may now  import gold under 20:80 scheme subject to the following conditions:
The STH/PTH should have imported gold prior to the  introduction of 20:80 scheme. STH / PTH should get the required verification  done by the Department of Customs at any port where they have imported gold  consignment in the past.
The first lot of gold under this scheme would be based on  the highest monthly import during any of the last 24 months prior to the RBI’s  notification dated August 14, 2013, subject to a maximum of 2000 Kgs.
As in the case of other nominated agencies, the eligible  quantity may be imported by STH / PTHs from any port, subject to their  eligibility limit / maximum quantity allowed to them.
For proper compliance, before import, they  must submit the import plan, port-wise and quantity-wise, to the concerned  Customs office, where the verification of the figures of past performance was  done. This information will be sent to all the other ports from which imports  are permitted. The overall discipline of exporting 20% of each imported  consignment before the next consignment is imported will be equally applicable  to such STH/PTH importers.
4. Further, it has been decided to permit the nominated  banks, to give Gold Metal Loans (GML) to domestic jewellery manufacturers  out of the eligible domestic import quota of  80% to the extent of GML outstanding in their books as on March 31, 2013.
5. A revised  working example of the operations of 20:80 scheme envisaged in terms of the  revised instructions is given in the
Annex
.
6. All  other instructions will remain unchanged
7. Authorised dealers may please bring the contents of this circular to the  notice of their constituents and customers concerned.
8. The  directions contained in this circular have been issued under Section 10(4) and  Section 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA), 1999 (42 of 1999),  and are without prejudice to permissions / approvals, if any, required under  any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(C D Srinivasan)
Chief General Manager
Annex
Revised working example of the operations of 20/80
scheme for import of gold
*
1. A Nominated Bank / Agency / any other entity,  ABC, imports say 100 kg of gold, which shall be routed through custom bonded  warehouses only. If considered necessary, the lot can be procured through two  invoices – one for exporters (i.e. 20%) and the other one for domestic users  (80%).
2. Out of the above import of 100 kg, 20 kg gold  held in the bonded warehouse can be got released, in part or full, to be made  available to the exporters of gold against an undertaking to Customs  Authorities as is the practice now.
3. The balance 80 kg can be sold / lent in part or  full to domestic entities engaged in jewellery business / bullion dealers/  banks operating the Gold Deposit Scheme (GDS) and Gold Metal Loan (GML). The  sale of imported gold will be against full upfront payment, except in the case  of GML, where nominated banks can give GML   to domestic jewellery manufacturers to the extent of GML outstanding in  their books as on March 31, 2013. In other words, no credit sale of gold in any  form will be permitted for domestic use, except for GML. In case, the Nominated  Bank itself is operating the Gold Deposit Scheme and extend Gold Metal Loans  out of gold mobilized under GDS, the bank will be permitted to use, out of 80  kg, a portion for replenishing gold given as GML.
4. Next lot of import of 100 kg of gold by ABC  shall be permitted by the Customs Authorities only after the proof of export  (i.e. 20% of the imported lot) is submitted.
5. Import of gold in the third lot onwards will be  lesser of the two:
i)
Five times the export for which proof has  been submitted;
or
ii)
Quantity of gold permitted to a Nominated Agency in the first or second  lot.
Note: The same procedure is to be followed by the  refineries and by any other entity importing gold in any other form / purity  and in the case of import of Gold Dore also.
* First lot of gold import will not exceed 20%  of the maximum of the imports done in any of the previous three financial years  since the end of the preceding financial year’.