(49 kb)
Foreign Exchange Management (Crystallization of Inoperative Foreign Currency Deposits) Regulations, 2014
RESERVE BANK  OF INDIA
FOREIGN  EXCHANGE DEPARTMENT
CENTRAL  OFFICE
MUMBAI-400  001
Notification No.FEMA.10A/2014-RB
Dated : March 21, 2014
Foreign Exchange  Management (Crystallization of Inoperative Foreign Currency Deposits)  Regulations, 2014.
In exercise of the  powers conferred by clause (f) of sub-section (3) of section 6, sub-section (b)  of Section 9 and sub-section (2) of section 47 of the Foreign Exchange  Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999), the Reserve Bank makes the following  regulations relating to inoperative foreign currency deposits, namely:-
1. Short title and commencement:-
These regulations may be  called the Foreign Exchange Management (Crystallization of Inoperative Foreign  Currency Deposits) Regulations, 2014.
They shall come into force  from the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.
2. Definitions:-
In these Regulations unless the  context otherwise requires, -
‘Act’ means the Foreign  Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999);
‘Authorised Bank' means a  bank including a co-operative bank (other than an authorised dealer) authorised  by the Reserve Bank to maintain an account of a person resident outside India;
‘Authorised Dealer' means a person authorised as an authorised  dealer under sub-section (1) of section 10 of the Act;
‘Crystallisation’ means conversion of credit balances in any inoperative foreign  currency denominated deposit to Indian Rupee.
‘Deposit' means and includes account balances or deposit of money  with an Authorised bank.
3. Crystallisation of inoperative       foreign currency deposits -
1) In  case a foreign currency denominated deposit with a fixed maturity date remains  inoperative for a period of three years from the date of maturity of the  deposit, at the end of the third year, the authorised bank shall convert the  balances lying in the foreign currency denominated deposit into Indian Rupee at  the exchange rate prevailing as on that date. Thereafter, the depositor shall  be entitled to claim either the said Indian Rupee proceeds and interest thereon,  if any, or the  foreign currency  equivalent (calculated at the rate prevalent as on the date of payment) of the  Indian Rupee proceeds of  the original  deposit and interest, if any, on such Indian Rupee proceeds.
2) In case of foreign currency denominated  deposit with no fixed maturity period, if the deposit remains inoperative for a  period of three years (debit of bank charges not to be reckoned as operation),  the authorised bank shall, after giving a three month notice to the depositor  at his last known address as available with it, convert the deposit from the  foreign currency in which it is denominated to Indian Rupee at the end of the  notice period at the prevailing exchange rate. Thereafter, the depositor shall  be entitled to claim either the said Indian Rupee proceeds and interest thereon,  if any, or the  foreign currency  equivalent (calculated at the rate prevalent as on the date of payment) of the  Indian Rupee proceeds of  the original  deposit and interest, if any, on such Indian Rupee proceeds.
(Rudra Narayan Kar)
Chief General Manager-in-Charge
Published  in the Official Gazette of Government
of  India  – Extraordinary – Part-II, Section 3,
Sub-Section (i) dated 07.04.2014- G.S.R.No.271 (E)