(22 kb)
Foreign investment in India – participation by registered FPIs, SEBI registered long term investors and NRIs in non-convertible/redeemable preference shares or debentures of Indian companies
RBI/2013-14/632
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.140
June 6, 2014
To
All Category – I Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam/ Sir,
Foreign  investment in India – participation by registered FPIs, SEBI registered long  term investors and NRIs in non-convertible/redeemable  preference shares or debentures of Indian companies
Attention  of Authorized Dealer Category-I (AD Category-I) banks is invited to Schedule 5  to the Foreign Exchange Management (Transfer or Issue of Security by a Person  Resident outside India) Regulations, 2000 (the Principal Regulations) notified vide
Notification No. FEMA.20/2000-RB dated May 3, 2000
,  as amended from time to time, in terms of which SEBI registered Foreign  Institutional Investors (FIIs), Qualified Foreign Investors (QFIs), registered  Foreign Portfolio Investors (FPIs) and long term investors registered with  SEBI, may purchase, on repatriation basis, Government securities and  non-convertible debentures (NCDs) / bonds issued by an Indian company subject  to such terms and conditions as mentioned therein and limits as prescribed for  the same by RBI and SEBI from time to time. The present limits for investments  by FIIs/FPIs, QFIs and long term investors registered with SEBI in corporate  debt stands at USD 51 billion.
2. Attention of AD Category - I banks is also  invited to
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 84 dated January 6, 2014
in terms of whichan Indian company is  permitted to issue non-convertible/redeemable preference shares or debentures  to non-resident shareholders, including the depositories that act as trustees  for the ADR/GDR holders by way of distribution as bonus from its general  reserves under a Scheme of Arrangement approved by a Court in India under the  provisions of the Companies Act, as applicable, subject to no-objection from  the Income Tax Authorities.
3.  On review, it has now been decided to allow registered Foreign Institutional  Investors (FIIs), Qualified Foreign Investors (QFIs) deemed as registered Foreign Portfolio  investors, registered Foreign Portfolio Investors (FPIs), long term investors  registered with SEBI – Sovereign Wealth Funds (SWFs), Multilateral Agencies,  Pension/ Insurance/ Endowment Funds, foreign Central Banks to invest on repatriation basis, in non-convertible/redeemable  preference shares or debentures issued by an Indian company in terms of
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 84 dated January 6, 2014
and listed on  recognized stock exchanges in India, within the overall  limit of USD 51 billion earmarked for corporate debt. Further, NRIs may also  invest, both on repatriation and non-repatriation basis, in non-convertible/redeemable preference shares or debentures as  above.
4. AD Category - I banks may bring the contents of  this circular to the notice of their constituents and customers.
5. Reserve Bank has since  amended the Principal Regulations through the Foreign Exchange Management  (Transfer or Issue of Security by a Person Resident outside India) (Fifth Amendment)  Regulations, 2014 notified vide
Notification No. FEMA. 304 /2014-RB dated May 22,  2014
, c.f.  G.S.R. No.371(E) dated May 30, 2014.
6. The directions contained in this circular have been issued under  sections 10(4) and 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of  1999) and are without prejudice to permissions / approvals, if any, required  under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(B.P. Kanungo)
Principal Chief General Manager