(19 kb)
Money changing Activities - Powers of Director to impose Fine
RBI/2013-14/642
A. P. (DIR  Series) Circular No. 143
June 16, 2014
To,
All Authorised Persons
Madam / Sir,
Know Your Customer (KYC) norms/Anti-Money  Laundering (AML) standards/ Combating the Financing of Terrorism (CFT)/  Obligation of Authorised Persons under Prevention of Money Laundering Act  (PMLA), 2002 – Amendment to Section 13(2) – Money Changing Activities
Please refer to our
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular  No.17 [A.P. (FL/RL Series) Circular No.04] dated November 27, 2009
on ‘Know  Your Customer (KYC) norms/Anti-Money Laundering (AML) standards/Combating the  Financing of Terrorism (CFT)/Obligation of Authorised Persons under Prevention  of Money Laundering Act, (PMLA), 2002, as amended by Prevention of Money  Laundering (Amendment) Act, 2009 - Money changing activities’, as amended from  time to time.
2. With  the enactment of Prevention of Money Laundering (Amendment) Act, 2012 and  amendment to Section 13 of the Act which provides for “Powers of Director to  impose fine”, the section 13(2) now reads as under:
“If the Director, in the course of any inquiry,  finds that a reporting entity or its designated director on the Board or any of  its employees has failed to comply with the obligations under this Chapter,  then, without prejudice to any other action that may be taken under any other  provisions of this Act, he may—
issue a warning in writing; or
direct such reporting entity or its designated  director on the Board or any of its employees, to comply with specific  instructions; or
direct such reporting entity or its designated  director on the Board or any of its
employees, to send reports at such interval as may be  prescribed on the measures it is taking; or
by an order, levy a fine on such reporting entity  or its designated director on the Board or any of its employees, which shall  not be less than ten thousand rupees but may extend to one lakh rupees for each  failure.”
3. In  view of the above amendment, Authorised Persons may nominate a Director on  their Boards as “designated Director” to ensure compliance with the obligations  under the Prevention of Money Laundering (Amendment) Act, 2012. 4. The  directions contained in this Circular have been issued under Section 10(4) and  Section 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and  also under the, Prevention of Money Laundering Act, (PMLA), 2002, as amended  from time to time and are without prejudice to permission /approvals, if any,  required under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(B. P. Kanungo)
Principal Chief General Manager