(19 kb)
Cross Border Inward Remittance under Money Transfer Service Scheme
RBI/2013-14/643
A. P. (DIR  Series) Circular No. 144
June 16, 2014
To,
All Authorised Persons, who are Indian Agents  under Money Transfer Service Scheme (MTSS)
Madam / Sir,
Know Your Customer (KYC) norms/Anti-Money  Laundering (AML) standards/ Combating the Financing of Terrorism (CFT)/  Obligation of Authorised Persons under Prevention of Money Laundering Act  (PMLA), 2002 - Amendment to Section 13(2) - Cross Border Inward Remittance  under Money Transfer Service Scheme
Please refer to our
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular  No.18 [A.P. (FL Series) Circular No. 05] dated November 27, 2009
on ‘Know Your  Customer (KYC) norms/Anti-Money Laundering (AML) standards/Combating the  Financing of Terrorism (CFT)/Obligation of Authorised Persons under Prevention  of Money Laundering Act, (PMLA), 2002, as amended by Prevention of Money  Laundering (Amendment) Act, 2009- Cross Border Inward Remittance under Money  Transfer Service Scheme’, as amended from time to time.
2. With the enactment of Prevention of Money  Laundering (Amendment) Act, 2012 and amendment to Section 13 of the Act which  provides for “Powers of Director to impose fine”, the section 13(2) now reads  as under:
“If the Director, in the course of any inquiry,  finds that a reporting entity or its designated director on the Board or any of  its employees has failed to comply with the obligations under this Chapter,  then, without prejudice to any other action that may be taken under any other  provisions of this Act, he may—
(a) issue a warning in writing; or
(b) direct such reporting entity or its  designated director on the Board or any of its employees, to comply with  specific instructions; or
(c) direct such reporting entity or  its designated director on the Board or any of its
employees, to send reports at such interval as may be  prescribed on the measures it is taking; or
(d) by an order, levy a fine on such reporting  entity or its designated director on the Board or any of its employees, which  shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but may extend to one lakh rupees  for each failure.”
3. In view of the above amendment, Authorised  Persons, who are Indian Agents under MTSS, may nominate a Director on their  Boards as “designated Director” to ensure compliance with the obligations under  the Prevention of Money Laundering (Amendment) Act, 2012.
4. The directions contained in this Circular have  been issued under Section 10(4) and Section 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange  Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and also under the, Prevention of Money  Laundering Act, (PMLA), 2002, as amended from time to time and are without  prejudice to permission /approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(B. P. Kanungo)
Principal Chief General Manager