(135 kb)
Prudential Norms on Income Recognition, Asset Classification and Provisioning Pertaining to Advances - Projects under Implementation
RBI/2013-14/664
DBOD.No.BP.BC.125/21.04.048/2013-14
June  26, 2014
The Chairman and Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer
All Scheduled Commercial Banks
(Excluding Local Area Banks and Regional Rural Banks)
Dear Sir,
Prudential Norms on Income  Recognition, Asset Classification and
Provisioning Pertaining to Advances - Projects under Implementation
Please refer to
circulars  DBOD.No.BP.BC.85/21.04.048/2009-10 dated March 31, 2010
and
DBOD.BP.BC.No.99/21.04.132/ 2012-13  dated May 30, 2013
, containing,
inter alia
, instructions relating to  asset classification for project loans before commencement of commercial  operations.
2. In terms of extant  instructions contained in the above mentioned circulars, revisions of the date  of commencement of commercial operations (DCCO) and consequential shift in repayment  schedule for equal or shorter duration (including the start date and end date  of revised repayment schedule)
will not be treated as restructuring
provided that:
The revised DCCO falls within  the period of two years and one year from the original DCCO stipulated at the  time of financial closure for infrastructure projects and non-infrastructure  projects respectively;  and
All other terms and  conditions of the loan remain unchanged.
3. Further, banks may restructure  such loans, subject to the extant prudential norms on restructuring of advances,  by way of revision of DCCO beyond the time limits quoted at paragraph 2(a)  above and
retain the ‘standard’ asset classification
, if the fresh DCCO is fixed  within the following limits, and the account continues to be serviced as per  the restructured terms:
(a)
Infrastructure Projects involving court cases
Up to another two years  (beyond the two year period quoted at paragraph 2(a) above, i.e., total  extension of four years), in case the reason for extension of DCCO is arbitration  proceedings or a court case.
(b)
Infrastructure Projects delayed for other reasons beyond the control  of promoters
Up to another one year (beyond  the two year period quoted at paragraph 2(a) above, i.e., total extension of three  years), in case the reason for extension of DCCO is beyond  the control of promoters (other than court cases).
(c)
Project Loans  for Non-Infrastructure Sector
(Other than Commercial Real Estate Exposures)
Up to another one year (beyond the one year period quoted at paragraph 2(a) above, i.e., total  extension of two years).
4. In this connection, it  is clarified that multiple revisions of the DCCO and consequential shift in repayment  schedule for equal or shorter duration (including the start date and end date  of revised repayment schedule)
will be treated as a single event of restructuring
provided that the revised  DCCO is fixed within the respective time limits quoted at paragraph 3 (a) to  (c) above and all other terms and conditions of the loan remained unchanged.
5. It may be further  clarified that, if deemed fit, banks may extend DCCO beyond the respective time  limits quoted at paragraph 3 (a) to (c) above; however, in that case, banks  will not be able to retain the ‘standard’ asset classification status of such  loan accounts.
Yours  faithfully,
(Rajesh  Verma)
Chief General Manager-in-Charge