(105 kb)
Defaulters of Rs. 1 crore and above (non-suit filed accounts) and Wilful Defaulters of Rs. 25 lakhs and above (non-suit filed accounts) – Changes in reporting to Reserve Bank of India (RBI)/Credit Information Companies (CICs)
RBI/2013-14/667
DBOD.No.CID.BC.128  /20.16.003/2013-14
June 27, 2014
All Commercial Banks (excluding RRBs),
All India Notified Financial Institutions, and
All Credit Information Companies
Dear Sir / Madam
Defaulters of Rs. 1  crore and above (non-suit filed accounts) and Wilful Defaulters of Rs. 25 lakhs  and above (non-suit filed accounts) – Changes in reporting to Reserve Bank of India  (RBI)/Credit Information Companies (CICs)
Please refer to our circulars DBOD.No.BC/CIS/47/20.16.002/94  dated April 23, 1994 on Disclosure of Information on Defaulting Borrowers of  banks / Notified  All India Financial Institutions (FIs) and the
Master  Circular DBOD.No.CID.BC.3/20.16.003/2013-14 dated July 1, 2013
on Wilful  Defaulters.
2. As  you are aware, a Committee to Recommend Data Format for Furnishing of Credit Information  to Credit Information Companies (Chairman: Shri Aditya Puri) was constituted by  the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). The Report of the Committee was placed on RBI’s  website on March 22, 2014 inviting comments on its recommendations. A copy of  the Report of the Committee is attached for reference.
(
http://rbi.org.in/scripts/PublicationReportDetails.aspx?UrlPage=&ID=763
)
3. The  Committee has made certain recommendations regarding changes in the commercial data  format for reporting of data in respect of defaulters/wilful defaulters [paragraph  8.13(a) of the Report] and on dissemination of information pertaining to  defaulters and wilful defaulters [paragraph 8.37 of the Report].
4. Presently, banks/FIs  submit the following data to RBI:
(i) Defaulting borrowers (non-suit filed accounts)  of Rs. 1 crore and above on a half-yearly basis, and
(ii) Wilful Defaulters  (non-suit filed accounts) of Rs. 25 lakhs and above on a quarterly basis.
RBI  compiles this data and disseminates two separate lists viz. List of Defaulters [(non-suit filed accounts)  of Rs.1 crore and above] and Wilful Defaulters [( non-suit filed accounts) of  Rs. 25 lakh and above] to the banks/FIs.
5.  Banks/FIs had been advised vide our
circular DBOD.No.CID.BC.30/20.16.042/2011-12  dated September 5, 2011
to submit to Credit Information Companies (CICs) the  following information:
(i) Quarterly list of suit filed accounts of Rs.1 crore and above,  classified as doubtful or loss, and
(ii) List of suit filed accounts of wilful defaulters of Rs.25 lakhs and  above, as at end-March, June, September and December, every year.
Further,  CICs have also been advised to disseminate credit information covering data  supplied by banks/FIs on such suit-filed accounts on their respective websites.
6. The present procedure related to reporting of  data on defaulters and wilful defaulters to RBI as described in paragraph 4  above and dissemination thereof by RBI is in offline mode and hence there is a  time lag in disseminating consolidated information on the borrowers.This  procedure predates the enactment of Credit Information Companies Act, 2005  (CICRA), when there was no system of centralised credit information on  borrowers. With the establishment of the four CICs, a system of centralised  credit information is currently in place and banks/FIs already have a system of  reporting credit information to the CICs. However the databases of the CICs are  not adequately populated with commercial borrowers’ data. Therefore, in terms  of paragraph 2(iii) of the
circular DBOD.CID.BC.127/20.16.056/2013-14  dated June 27, 2014
on ‘Data Format for  Furnishing of Credit Information to Credit Information Companies and other  Regulatory Measures’, banks/FIs have been advised to report data in respect of  their corporate borrowers to the CICs in a timely manner and CICs may populate  their databases with commercial data records within six months.
7. In view of the above and  after examining the recommendations of the Committee, it has been decided to  implement the following measures with regard to reporting and dissemination of  information on defaulters/wilful defaulters:
Banks/FIs may continue to furnish the data on wilful defaulters (non-suit filed accounts) of Rs. 25 lakhs and above for the quarter ending June 30, 2014 and September 30, 2014 to RBI. Similarly, in respect of defaulters (non-suit filed accounts) of Rs. 1 crore and above, they may continue to submit the data to RBI for the half year ending September 30, 2014 in the existing format.
In terms of Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005, banks/FIs are advised to furnish the aforementioned data in respect of wilful defaulters(non-suit filed accounts) of Rs. 25 lakhs  and above for the quarter ending December 31, 2014 and the data on defaulters(non-suit filed accounts) of Rs. 1 crore and above for the half year ending December 31, 2014 to CICs and
not to RBI
. Thereafter, banks/FIs may continue to furnish data in respect of defaulters/wilful defaulters to CICs on a monthly or a more frequent basis. This would enable such information to be available to the banks/FIs on a near real time basis.
In order to facilitate banks/FIs to furnish the above data in respect of defaulters/wilful defaulters, CICs are advised to make necessary changes in the commercial data format so that all the fields viz. Director's Name and type (whether Nominee or  Independent director), DIN No., Address, date of classification of default, etc. in the existing format used for submitting data to RBI are captured. [cf. paragraph 2 (iii) of our circular as referred to in paragraph 6 above]
8. Other terms and conditions of the aforementioned circulars on defaulters and wilful defaulters will remain unchanged.
Yours faithfully,
(Sudarshan  Sen)
Chief General Manager