(87 kb)
Inter-Governmental Agreement (IGA) with United States of America (US) under Foreign Accounts Tax Compliance Act (FATCA)- Registration
RBI/2013-14/668
DBOD. AML. No. 20472/14.07.018/2013-14
June 27, 2014
The  Chairpersons / CEOs of all Scheduled Commercial Banks
(Excluding RRBs)/Local Area Banks / All India  Financial Institutions
Dear Madam/Sir,
Inter-Governmental Agreement (IGA) with  United States of America (US)
under Foreign Accounts Tax Compliance Act (FATCA)-  Registration
Government  of India (GoI), has advised that India and US have reached an agreement in  substance on the terms of an Inter-Governmental Agreement (IGA) to implement  FATCA and India is now treated as having an IGA in effect from April 11, 2014. However,  IGA would be signed only after the approval of Cabinet.
2. In this regard, Indian Financial Institutions are  advised to take note of the following:
Indian  Financial Institutions would have time upto December 31, 2014 to register with  US authorities and obtain a Global Intermediary Identification Number (GIIN).
Indian Financial Institutions having  overseas branches in Model 1 jurisdictions, including those jurisdictions where  an agreement under Model I has been reached in substance would have time upto  December 31, 2014 to register with US authorities and obtain a GIIN. Since IGA  would be signed after obtaining the approval of the Cabinet, such financial  institutions having overseas branches in Model 1 jurisdictions should register  only after the formal IGA is signed. This will be communicated in due course.
Overseas branches of Indian Financial  Institutions in a jurisdiction having IGA 2 agreement or in a jurisdiction that  does not have an IGA but permits financial institutions to register and agree  to an FFI agreement, may register with US authorities and obtain a GIIN before  July 1, 2014, to avoid potential withholding under FATCA.
Overseas branches of Indian Financial  Institutions in jurisdiction that does not have a IGA and does not permit  financial institutions to register and agree to an Foreign Financial  Institution (FFI) agreement may not register and their overseas branches would  eventually be subject to withholding under FATCA.
GoI has further advised that if registration of the  parent bank/ head office is a pre-requisite for a branch to register, such  banks may register as per the time line indicated at (b) and (c) above.
3.  Kindly acknowledge receipt of this circular.
Yours faithfully,
(Lily  Vadera)
Chief General Manager