(166 kb)
Master Circular on Board of Directors - UCBs
RBI/2014-15/17
UBD.CO. BPD . MC. No.8/12.05.001/2014-15
July 1, 2014
Chief Executive Officers of
All Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks
Dear Sir/Madam,
Master  Circular on Board of Directors - UCBs
Please refer to our
Master  Circular UBD.BPD. MC. No. 8/12.05.001/2012-13 dated July 2, 2012
on the  captioned subject (available at RBI website
www.rbi.org.in
). The  enclosed
Master Circular
consolidates and updates all the instructions /  guidelines on the subject up to June 30, 2013.
Yours faithfully
(A.K.Bera)
Principal Chief General Manager
Master Circular - Board of Directors
Contents
1.
Constitution of    Board of Directors
2.
Role of Directors    on the Board of Directors – Dos’ and Don’ts
3.
Audit Committee    of the Board
4.
Calendar of    Reviews – Matters to be placed before the Board of Directors
5.
Loans and    advances to Directors
6.
Donations to trusts and institutions  where directors, their relatives hold  position or are interested
7.
Payment of fees    and allowances to Directors
Annexure    1 - Recommendation made by the Madhava Das Committee on Urban Co-operative    Banks in regards to board of director
Annexure    2 Review to be submitted to the board    of directors of primary (urban) co-operative banks
Appendix
1 CONSTITUTION OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS
1.1 The primary (urban) co-operative banks  have been functioning under the supervision and control of Reserve Bank of  India for banking related functions in terms of the powers vested in it, under  Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (As applicable to co-operative societies) and the  Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.
1.2 However, the administrative and  managerial functions, elections and appointment of directors, etc. of these  banks come under the purview of respective State/Central Government by virtue  of the provisions of the respective state co-operative societies act and multi  state co-operative societies act. The  various co-operative societies acts, the bye-laws framed there under and model  bye-laws spell out the duties, functions and obligations of directors of these  banks.
1.3 Since the directors are elected from  amongst the members (except co-opted and nominated directors), the persons who  are not eligible for admission even as members cannot act as promoters or  become directors of the bank. In  particular, persons engaged in money lending, financing and investment  activities, either in individual capacity or as  proprietor/partner/employee/director of any concern as also those convicted of  any criminal offences including moral turpitude are ineligible in terms of  clause b (ii) of the model by-law no.9 and/or the provisions contained in the  co-operative societies act (concerned). The Board of Directors (BODs) is primarily concerned with the formulation  of policies keeping in view the guidelines issued by RBI and state/central  government. The Board should also  exercise overall supervision and control over the functioning of the bank,  leaving day to day administration to the chief executive officer.
1.4 The recommendations made by the  “Committee on Urban Co-operative Banks”, headed by Shri Madhava Das, regarding  the BODs and recommended by Reserve Bank for adoption by the banks are  indicated in
Annex 1
.
1.5 The directors of primary (urban)  co-operative banks must be knowledgeable and persons of high integrity. They must function in a cohesive manner and  provide proper leadership for the smooth and efficient management of the  affairs of the bank. This calls for a  certain degree of professionalism in the BODs.
1.6 To ensure professionalism in the Board,  the banks should have atleast two directors with suitable banking experience  (at middle/senior management level) or with relevant professional qualification  in the fields of law, accountancy or finance. Banks should also have a suitable  provision in their bye-laws to ensure this. However, these instructions would  not be insisted upon in case of Salary Earners' Banks in view of the nature of  their membership.
2 ROLE  OF DIRECTORS - DOs AND DON’TS
2.1 The  BODs of the primary (urban) co-operative bank should ensure that proper loan  policies are adopted and followed.
2.2 It  should be ensured that all circulars and other material relating to policies  issued by RBI/Government are seen by every member of the Board and also placed  before the Board for suitable action.
2.3 A list  of
DOs and DON’TS
for guidance of  the directors of primary (urban) co-op. banks is given below. The list is illustrative and not exhaustive  and is not to be regarded as a substitute for the specified duties,  responsibilities or rights of the Board of Directors as enunciated in the  co-operative law and/or bye-laws of the respective banks.
DOs
(a)
Discipline & Involvement:
The  directors should:
attend the board meetings regularly and effectively. They should work in the spirit of  co-operation.
study  the board papers thoroughly and use the good offices of the chief executive  officer for eliciting any information at the Board Meetings.
ask the  chairman to furnish the board papers and follow up reports on a definite time  schedule.
be  familiar with the broad objectives of the bank and the policy laid down by the Government  and the Reserve Bank of India.
involve themselves thoroughly in the  matter of formulation of general policy and also ensure that performance of the  bank is monitored adequately at board level.
(b)
Constructive  & Developmental Role:
The directors should:
welcome  all constructive ideas for better management of the bank and for making  valuable contributions.
try to  give as much of their wisdom, guidance and knowledge as possible to the  management.
try to  analyse the trends of economy, assist in the discharge of management’s  responsibility to public and formulation of measures to improve customer  service and be generally of constructive assistance to the bank management.
work as a team and not sponsor or be  prejudiced against individual proposals.  Management on its part is supposed to furnish full facts and complete  papers in advance.
(c)
Business  Specific Contribution
The directors should bestow attention on the  following aspects of the bank’s working:
compliance with monetary and credit policies  of RBI/Government
observance of cash reserve ratio and statutory  liquidity ratio
efficient management of funds and improving  profitability
compliance with guidelines on income  recognition, asset classification, provisioning towards non performing assets.
deployment of funds to priority sector/weaker  sections
overdues and recovery – ensure that  recoveries are made promptly and overdues reduced to the minimum.
review of action taken on RBI inspection  /statutory audit reports.
vigilance,  frauds and misappropriation
strengthening of internal control system and  housekeeping viz. proper maintenance of books of accounts and periodical  reconciliation.
reviews on several items as prescribed by  RBI/Government
customer service
development of a good management information  system
computerization
DON’TS
(a)
Non-Interference :
The directors should  not:
interfere  in the day-to-day functioning of the bank.
involve  themselves in the routine or every day business and in the management  functions.
send  instructions/directions to any individual officer/employee of the bank in any manner.
(b)
No Sponsorship:
The directors should not
sponsor  any loan proposal, buildings and sites for bank’s premises, enlistment or  empanelment of contractors, architects, doctors, lawyers, etc.
approach  or influence for sanction of any kind of facility.
participate  in the Board discussion, if a proposal in which they are directly or indirectly  interested, comes up for discussion.  They should disclose their interest, well in advance, to the Chief  Executive Officer and the Board.
sponsor  any candidate for recruitment or promotion or interfere in the process of  selection/appointment or in transfers of staff.
do  anything which will interfere with and/or be subversive of maintenance of  discipline, good conduct and integrity of the staff.
involve  themselves in any matter relating to personnel administration – whether it is  appointment, transfer, posting or promotion or redressal of individual  grievances of any employee.
encourage  the individual officer/employee or unions approaching them in any matter.
(c)
Confidentiality
The  directors should not reveal any information relating to any constituent of the  bank to anyone as, he is under oath of secrecy and fidelity.
The  directors are expected to ensure confidentiality of the bank’s agenda papers/notes. The board papers may ordinarily be returned  to the bank after the meeting.
The  directors should not directly call for papers/files/notes recorded by  various departments for scrutiny etc.  in respect of agenda items to be discussed in the meetings. All information/clarification that they may  require for taking a decision should be made available by the executive.
A  director may indicate his directorship of the bank on his visiting card or  letter head, but the logos of distinctive design of the bank should not be  displayed on the visiting card/letter head.
The directors should ensure that the  bank’s funds are utilized in a proper and judicious manner for the benefit of  general members.
3 AUDIT COMMITTEE OF BOARD (ACB)
3.1 In order to ensure and enhance the  effectiveness of internal audit/inspection as a management tool, an Apex Audit  Committee should be set up at the board level for overseeing and providing  directions to the internal audit/inspection machinery and other executives of  the bank. The committee may consist of  the chairman and three/four directors, one or more of such directors being  chartered accountant or having experience in management, finance, accountancy  and audit systems, etc.
3.2 ACB  should review the implementation of the guidelines issued by RBI and submit a  note thereon, to the board, at quarterly intervals. The major duties/responsibilities of the ACB  are given below:
it  should provide direction and oversee the operations of the total audit function  in the bank. The total audit function  will imply the organization, operationalisation and quality control of internal  audit and inspection within the bank and follow up on the statutory audit of  the bank and inspection of the Reserve Bank;
it should review the internal  inspection/audit function in the bank – the system, its quality and  effectiveness in terms of follow up. It  should review the follow up action on the internal inspection reports. It should also specially focus on the follow  up on:
inter  – branch adjustment accounts
unreconciled  long outstanding entries in inter-branch accounts and inter-bank accounts
arrears in balancing of  books at various branches
frauds and
all other major areas of housekeeping
compliance with the statutory audit /concurrent audit /RBI inspection  reports;
omission on the part of internal  inspecting officials to detect serious irregularities and
periodical  review of the accounting policies/systems in the bank with a view to ensuring  greater transparency in the bank’s accounts and adequacy of accounting  controls.
4 CALENDAR  OF REVIEWS – MATTERS TO BE PLACED BEFORE THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
It has been emphasized in the list of
Dos’ and Don’ts
for the Board of  Directors (para 2) that directors should bestow their attention on the  periodical reviews on important aspects of bank’s working. An illustrative list of the reviews which  should receive the attention of the directors as also the periodicity at which  these may be placed before the Board of Directors is indicated in Annex 2.
5 PROHIBITION ON LOANS AND ADVANCES
5.1 Primary (urban)  cooperative banks are prohibited from making, providing or renewing either  secured or unsecured loans and advances or extending any other financial  accommodation to their directors, or their relatives and the  firms/concerns/companies in which they are interested with effect from 1  October 2003. The existing advances may be allowed to continue upto the date when  they are due.
5.2 The following categories  of director-related loans are exempted from the purview of the above  instructions.
Regular employee-related loans to staff directors  on the Board of UCBs;
Normal loans as applicable to members to the  directors on the Boards of Salary Earners’ co-operative banks and
Normal employee-related loans to Managing Directors  of Multi-State co-operative banks.
Loans to Directors and their relatives against  Fixed Deposits and Life Insurance Policies standing in their own name.
5.3 The  words ‘any other financial accommodation’ shall include funded and non-funded  credit limits and underwritings and similar commitments, as under:
(a) The  funded limits shall include loans and advances by way of bills  purchase/discounting, pre-shipment and post-shipment credit facilities and  deferred payment guarantee limits extended for any purpose including purchase  of capital equipment and acceptance limits in connection therewith sanctioned  to borrowers, and guarantees by issue of which a bank undertakes financial  obligation to enable its constituents to acquire capital assets.
(b) The  non-funded limits shall include letters of credit, guarantees other than those  referred to in paragraph (a) above, and underwritings and similar commitments.
5.4 A person shall be deemed to be a relative of  another, if and only if:-
a) they are members  of a Hindu Undivided Family; or
b) they are husband and wife; or
c) the one is related to the other  in the manner indicated below:
List  of relatives
1. Father
2. Mother  including step-mother
3. Son  including step-son
4. Son’s  wife
5. Daughter  including step-daughter
6. Daughter’s  husband
7. Brother  (including step-brother)
8. Brother’s  wife
9. Sister  (including step-sister)
10. Sister’s  husband
6. DONATIONS TO TRUSTS AND INSTITUTIONS  WHERE DIRECTORS, THEIR RELATIVES HOLD  POSITION OR ARE INTERESTED
With effect from August 30, 2013 UCBs are  prohibited from giving donations to trusts and institutions, where directors,  and/or their relatives hold position or are interested, even within the  permissible ceiling of 1% of the published profit of the bank for the previous  year. The term ”relative” shall have the meaning as indicated in para 5.4  above. The term “interest” shall mean “trust in which directors/relatives of  directors hold positions as trustees, or are beneficiaries or involved in any  capacity in the working of the trust, which is likely to influence the  independence of the directors(s).
7 PAYMENT OF FEES AND ALLOWANCES TO  DIRECTORS
All expenses on the  conduct of Board meetings etc. may be shown against item 3 of P&L  Account. Such expenses would include  amounts actually paid to the directors and Local Committee members as also  amounts spent on their behalf for attending such meetings.
Annex  I
Master  Circular
Board of Directors
Recommendations  made by the Madhava Das Committee
on Urban Co-op. Banks in regard to Board of  Directors
[Vide para 1.4]
Recommendation
1. Board to provide Representation to Branch  Members
Representation on the  board of directors to members of branches is necessary with a view to involving  them in the management of the affairs of urban banks. The branches may be grouped according to the  following categories for the purpose of election of directors on the board.
Branches  within the limits of the head office, including only the branches within  about 25 Kms. from the head office town.
Branches falling outside the above limits  but within the district.
Branches outside the district including  those outside the state.
The representation may be based on membership and  not on deposits or loan business of branches.  Certain number of seats on the board may be provided exclusively for the  head office town and every branch in a group may get representation by  rotation.
2. Eligibility for Director’s Post
The extent of shareholding should not be the  determining factor in regard to eligibility to hold office as director in an  urban bank. A director should be elected  by virtue of the confidence he commands among the members. The existing stipulation that a minimum share  qualification for membership of the Board should not be insisted upon is,  therefore, salutary.
Those contesting for directorship in urban  banks should have been members for a minimum period of two years. Similarly, members contesting for election to  the Board should have had a minimum deposit of any type of Rs.500 in the urban  bank concerned for a minimum period of two years continuously.
3. Member’s Eligibility for Voting
To prevent instances of en-masse enrolment at the  instance of certain vested interests just before the general body meeting,  primarily with a view to capturing seats on the BODs and thereby destabilizing  or dislodging the Boards of efficiently managed urban banks, the members of a  primary (urban) cooperative bank should be allowed to participate in the  election of its Board of Management only after completion of a minimum period  of 12 months from the date of acquiring membership.
4. Women Representative on the Board
Where the scope for the organization of an urban  bank exclusively for women is limited in any area, the existing urban banks may  give representation to women members on the board of management and, wherever  necessary, set up a separate section to cater to the needs of women  members. At least one seat for women  shareholders may be reserved on the BODs.
5. Developmental Programmes for Board Members
The members on the BODs need regular programmes to  develop themselves into a competent policy and decision making body. These programmes may include exposing the  board members to short-term orientation courses, workshops, seminars and visits  to other banks. A suitable manual  prepared by banks themselves or Federations or Associations of urban banks may  be one of the methods of familiarizing the directors with their duties under  the by-laws. The National Co-operative  Union, in collaboration with the National Federation of Urban Co-operative  Banks and Credit Societies, and the State Federations or Associations of urban  banks, should apply itself to this very important task of educating and training  the boards of management of urban banks and draw-up co-coordinated programmes  for the purpose.
6. Chief Executive to be on the Board
The Chief executive of an urban bank should  preferably be a member of the BODs i.e., he should be a Managing Director.
7.State Government Nominee on the Board
State Government may nominate their representatives  on the board of directors of urban banks which are state partnered in regard to  share capital. The number of such  representatives should not exceed one-third of the total number of directors or  three, whichever is less. Further, the  directors nominated by the Government should preferably be competent  non-officials rather than officers from the Co-operative Department.
Appendix
Master  Circular
Boards of Directors
A. List  of Circulars consolidated in the Master Circular
No
Circular No.
Date
Subject
1
UBD.    PCB. Cir. No. 7 / 09.72.000/2013-14
30.8.2013
Donations to trusts and institutions    where directors, their relatives hold position or are interested
2
UBD.    PCB. Cir. No. 41 / 09.103.01/2007-08
21.04.2008
Professionalisation of    Managements of Urban Cooperative Banks
3
UBD.PCB.Cir. No. 6/09.103.01/2007-08
18.09.2007
Professionalisation of    Managements of Urban Cooperative Banks
4
UBD.PCB.Cir.No.    32/13.05.000/06-07
12.03.2007
Loans and advances    to directors, relatives and firms/concerns in which they are interested - UCBs
5
UBD.PCB.CIR.No.14/13.05.000/05-06
06.10.2005
Loans and advances to directors, relatives and firms/    concerns in which they are interested
6
UBD.BPD.CIR    54/13.05.00/2002-03
24.06.2003
Prohibition on loans & advances to directors and    their relatives
7
UBD.BPD.CIR    50/13.05.00/2002-03
29.04.2003
Prohibition on loans and advances to directors and    their relatives
8
UBD.BPD.CIR    36/09.06.00/2002-03
20.02.2003
Audit Committee of Boards of Directors
9
UBD.PCB.CIR.POT.39/09.10.3.01/2001-02
05.04.2002
Professionalisation boards of directors of primary    (urban) co-operative banks
10
UBD.POT.73/09.06.00/2000-01
12.07.2001
Audit Committee    of Board of Directors
11
UBD.No.Plan(PCB)12/09.08.00/2000-01
15.11.2000
Calendar of reviews - Matters to be place Board of    Directors operative Banks
12
UBD. No. I&L    (PCBs) 39 /12.05.00/96-97
07.02.1997
Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (AACS) – Section 29 –    Submission of Annual Balance Sheet and Profit & Loss Account – Payment of    Fees and Allowances to Directors
13
UBD.No.I&L/(PCBs)    41/12.05.00/96-97
27.02.1997
Banking Regulation Act,1949 (AS applicable to    Co-operative Societies) – Section 29- Submission of Annual Balance Sheet and    Profit and Loss Account – Payment of Fees and Allowances to Directors
14
UBD.No.    Plan.(PCB).11/09.08.00/94-95
02.08.1994
Calender of Reviews- Matters to be placed before the    Board of Directors of primary (urban) co-operative banks.
15
UBD.No.    Plan.(PCB).09/09.06.00/94-95
25.07.1994
Overseeing the internal audit function in banks setting    up of Audit Committee of Boards
16
UBD.No.    Plan.(PCB).CIR. 55/09.08.00/ 93-94
11.02.1994
Board of Directors of primary (urban) co-operative    banks- Professionalisation and their role - Dos and Don’ts
B. List of Circulars addressed to Registrar  of Co-operative Societies
No
Circular No.
Date
Subject
1.
UBD.No.Reh.2/15.05.04/94-95
19-07-94
Supersession of Board of    Directors of Primary co-operative banks
2.
UBD.No.649/16.04.01/93-94
22-02-94
Report of the Committee on    licensing of New Urban Co-operative Banks Amendments to State Co-operative    Societies Act
3.
UBD.No.Plan.702/UB.8(3)-89/90
17-01-90
VIII Meeting of the    Standing Advisory Committee for Urban Co-operative banks – Follow-up Action
4.
UBD.Reh.30/M.(19)-88/89
08-09-88
Supersession of Board of    Directors - Appointment of Panel of Administrators
5.
ACD.Plan.348/UB.1-78/9
20-04-79
Report of the committee on    urban co-operative banks