(455 kb)
Master Circular on Maintenance of Deposit Accounts –  Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks
RBI/2014-15/29
UBD.BPD.(PCB). MC.No:13/13.01.000/2014-15
July 1, 2014
The Chief Executive  Officers of
All Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks
Dear Sir,
Master  Circular on Maintenance of Deposit Accounts –
Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks
Please refer to our
Master  Circular UBD.BPD.(PCB).MC.No:13/13.01.000/2013-14 dated July 1, 2013
on  the captioned subject (available at RBI website
www.rbi.org.in
). The enclosed
Master  Circular
consolidates and updates all the instructions/guidelines on the subject  issued up to June 30, 2014 and mentioned in the Appendix.
Yours faithfully,
(A.K.Bera)
Principal Chief General Manager
Encls:  As above
Index
1
Introduction
2
Opening of Deposit    Accounts
2.1
Introduction    not Mandatory for opening accounts
2.2
Photographs    of Account Holders
2.3
Address    of the Account holders
2.4
Other    safeguards
2.5
Opening    of NRE/NRO accounts
3
Restrictions    on opening certain types of deposit accounts
3.1
Deposit    schemes with lock-in period
3.2
Opening    of Bank Accounts in the Names of Minors
3.3
Minor’s    account with mother as a guardian
4
Nomination    facilities
4.1
Operational    instructions
4.2
The    Act provisions
4.3
The    Rules
4.4
Record    of nomination
4.5
Nomination    facility in respect of articles in safe custody
4.6
Nomination    in respect of safe deposit locker accounts
5
Operations in accounts
5.1
Joint    accounts
5.2
Monitoring    operations in new accounts
5.3
Monitoring    operations in all accounts
5.4
Issue    of cheque books
5.5
Unclaimed    deposits and inoperative /dormant accounts
5.6
The    Depositor Education and Awareness Fund Scheme, 2014
5.7
Operation    of bank accounts by old/sick/incapacitated customers
5.8
Receipt    of foreign contributions
6
Settlement of claims    in respect of deceased depositors
6.1
Accounts    with survivor/nominee clause
6.3
Accounts    without the survivor/nominee clause
6.4
Premature    termination of term deposit accounts
6.5
Treatment    of flows in the name of the deceased depositor
6.6
Access    to the safe deposit lockers/safe custody articles
6.7
Time    limit for settlement of claims
6.8
Provisions    of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949
          (As Applicable to Co-operative Societies)
6.9
Customer    guidance and publicity
7
Settlement of claims    in respect of missing persons
8
Deposit mobilisation
8.1
Deposit    collection agents
8.2
Acceptance    of deposits by unincorporated bodies /private limited companies with ‘Bank    Guarantee’
8.3
Deposit    collection schemes floated by private organisations
9
Greater co-ordination between banking system and Income    Tax authorities
9.1
Safe    Deposit Lockers
9.2
Co-ordination    with Officers of Central Board of Direct Taxes
10
‘Know Your Customer’    (KYC) Guidelines and Anti
          Money Laundering (AML) Standards
Annex    I
Joint accounts –‘Either or    Survivor’, ‘Latter or survivor’,
          ‘Former or Survivor’, etc.
Annex II
The Depositor    Education and Awareness Fund Scheme, 2014
Annex    II (a)
The Depositor Education    and Awareness Fund Scheme, 2014 Guidelines
Appendix
List of circulars    consolidated in the Master Circular
Master  Circular
Maintenance of Deposit Accounts
1. Introduction
Acceptance  of deposits and maintenance of deposit accounts is the core activity in any  bank. The very basic legal interpretation of the word 'banking" as defined  in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 means accepting deposits of money, for the  purpose of lending or investment, from the public, repayable on demand or  otherwise, and withdrawable by cheque, draft, order or otherwise. Thus,  deposits are the major resource and mainstay of a bank and the main objective  of a bank is to mobilise adequate deposits. Various instructions, guidelines,  etc. issued from time to time to primary (urban) co-operative banks (UCBs) in  regard to opening and conduct/monitoring of deposit accounts are detailed  hereunder.
2. Opening  of Deposit Accounts
A  large number of frauds are perpetrated in banks mainly through opening of  accounts in fictitious names, irregular payment of cheques, manipulation of  accounts and unauthorised operations in accounts. Considering the fact that  opening of an account is the first entry point for any person to become a  customer of the bank, utmost vigilance in opening of accounts and operations in  the accounts is called for. Even the legal protection under the Negotiable  Instruments Act, 1881 which governs payment and collection of negotiable  instruments and provides certain rights, liabilities (obligations) and  protections to the issuers/drawers, payees, endorsees, drawees, collecting  banks and paying/drawee banks, will be available, only if the bank makes the  payment or receives payment of a cheque/draft payable to order in due course.  Any payment or collection of a negotiable instrument is deemed in due course  only when the bank acts in good faith and without negligence and does so for a  customer.
2.1 Introduction  not Mandatory for opening accounts
Before  implementation of the system of document-based verification of identity, as  laid down in PML Act / Rules, introduction from an existing customer of the  bank was considered necessary for opening of bank accounts. In many banks,  obtaining of introduction for opening of accounts is still a mandatory part of  customer acceptance policy even though documents of identity and address as  required under our instructions are provided. This poses difficulties for  prospective customers in opening accounts as they find it difficult to obtain  introduction from an existing account holder.
Since introduction is not necessary for opening  of accounts under PML Act and Rules or Reserve Bank's extant KYC instructions,  banks should not insist on introduction for opening bank accounts of customers.
2.2 Photographs  of Account Holders
2.2.1 Mandatory  Obtention of Photographs
The banks should obtain photographs  of the depositors/account holders who are authorised to operate the accounts at  the time of opening of all new accounts. The customers' photographs should be  recent and the cost of photographs to be affixed on the account opening forms  may be borne by the customers.
Only one set of photographs need to be  obtained and separate photographs should not be obtained for each category of  deposit. The applications for different types of deposit accounts should be  properly referenced.
Photographs of persons authorised to  operate the deposit accounts viz. S.B. and Current accounts should be obtained.  In case of other deposits viz. Fixed, Recurring, Cumulative etc. photographs of  all depositors in whose names the deposit receipt stands may be obtained,  except in the case of deposits in the name of minor, where guardians'  photographs could be obtained. Fresh photographs will be required to be  obtained from minor customers on their becoming major.
The banks should also obtain  photographs of ‘
Pardanashin’
women.
The banks should also obtain photographs of  Non-Resident (External) (NRE), Non-Resident Ordinary (Rupee) (NRO), Foreign  Currency Non-Resident (FCNR) account holders.
For  operations in the accounts, banks should not ordinarily insist on the presence  of account holder unless the circumstances so warrant. Photographs cannot be a  substitute for specimen signatures.
2.2.2 Exceptions
Banks, local authorities and  Government departments (excluding public sector undertakings or quasi-Government  bodies) are exempted from the requirement of photographs.
The photographs need not be obtained  for borrowal accounts viz. Cash Credit, Overdrafts accounts, etc.
The banks may not insist for photographs in case  of accounts of staff members (Single/Joint).
2.3
Address  of Account Holders
It  is not proper for banks even unwittingly to allow themselves to be utilised by  unscrupulous persons for the purpose of tax evasion. Therefore, banks should  obtain full and complete address of depositors and record these in the books  and the account opening forms so that the parties could be traced without  difficulty, in case of need. Independent confirmation of the address of the  account holder should be obtained in all cases.
2.4 Other Safeguards
2.4.1 Permanent Account  Number (PAN)/General Index Register (GIR) Number
The  banks are required to obtain PAN/GIR number of a depositor opening an account  with an initial deposit of Rs.50,000/- and above.
2.4.2 Authorisation
The  opening of new accounts should be authorised only by the Branch Manager or by  the Officer-in-Charge of the Deposit Accounts Department concerned at bigger  branches.
2.4.3 Completion of Formalities
The  banks should ensure that all account opening formalities are undertaken at the  bank's premises and no document is allowed to be taken out for execution. Where  it is absolutely necessary to make exception of the above rule, banks may take  precaution such as deputing an officer to verify the particulars, obtaining a  signed photograph on a suitably formatted verification sheet, forwarding by  registered Acknowledgement Due, mailing a copy of the account opening form and  accompanying instructions to the client for necessary verification before any  operations are conducted in the accounts.
2.4.4 Opening of current account – Need for  discipline
Keeping  in view the importance of credit discipline for reduction in Non-Performing  Assets (NPA) level of banks, banks should insist on a declaration from the  account-holder to the effect that he is not enjoying any credit facility with  any other bank or obtain a declaration giving particulars of credit facilities  enjoyed by him with any other bank(s). The account-opening bank should  ascertain all the details and should also inform the concerned lending bank(s).  The account-opening bank should obtain No-objection Certificate from such  banks.
However,  in case no response is received from the existing bankers after a minimum  period of a fortnight, banks may open current accounts of prospective  customers.
Further,  where the due diligence is carried out on the request of a prospective customer  who is a corporate customer or a large borrower enjoying credit facilities from  more than one bank, the bank may inform the consortium leader, if under  consortium, and the concerned banks, if under multiple banking  arrangement.
Banks  are advised to be guided by the need for effective due diligence in these  matters as also the objective of customer satisfaction and ensure that suitable  arrangements are in place for prompt and serious attention to references  received from banks in this regard.
2.4.5 Accounts of Proprietary Concerns
In the case of proprietary concerns, at the time  of opening of the account, the banks have to verify, in addition to the  identity of the individual proprietors, the identity of the proprietary concern  also. Accordingly, the banks may call for and verify the following documents:
(i) Identity  as also the address proof of the proprietor, such as passport, PAN card, Voter  ID card, Driving licence, Ration card with photo, etc. – any of these documents  is to be obtained.
(ii) Proof  of the name, address and activity of the concern, like registration certificate  (in the case of a registered concern), certificate/licence issued by the  Municipal authorities under Shop and Establishment Act, sales and income tax  Returns, CST/VAT certificate, Licence issued by the Registering authority like  Certificate of Practice issued by Institute of Chartered Accountants of India,  Institute of Cost Accountants of India, Institute of Company Secretaries of  India, Indian Medical council, Food and Drug Control Authorities, etc. – any  two of the documents are to be obtained. These documents should be in the name  of the proprietary concern. Apart from these documents, any  certificate/registration document issued by Sales Tax/Service Tax/Professional  Tax authorities may also be considered for verification of the proof of name,  address and activity of the proprietary concern.
(iii) With  effect from May 11, 2012, it has been decided to include the following documents  in the indicative list of required documents for opening accounts of  proprietary concerns :
The complete Income Tax Return (not  just the acknowledgement) in the name of the sole proprietor where the firm’s  income is reflected duly authenticated /acknowledged by the Income Tax  Authorities.
Utility bills such as electricity, water and  landline telephone bills in the name of the proprietary concern.
2.4.6 Accounts of Multi Level Marketing Firms
Certain  firms posing as Multi Level Marketing agencies for consumer goods and services  have been actually mobilising large amounts of deposits from the public with  promise of high returns. The representatives of such firms had opened accounts  at various bank branches to facilitate what was essentially a deposit taking  activity and the funds used apparently for illegal or highly risky activities.  Banks may, as advised vide our
circular UBD.CO.BPD.PCB.Cir.No.9/12.05.001/2009-10  dated September 16, 2009
, be careful in opening such accounts/undertake review  of such accounts and ensure strict compliance with Know Your  Customer(KYC)/Anti-Money Laundering (AML) Guidelines.
2.4.7  Financial Inclusion
UCBs are advised to offer a ‘Basic Savings Bank Deposit  Account’ which will offer following minimum common facilities to all their customers:-
The ‘Basic Savings Bank Deposit  Account’ should be considered a normal banking service available to all.
This account shall not have the  requirement of any minimum balance.
The services available in the  account will include deposit and withdrawal of cash at bank branch as well as  ATMs; receipt /credit of money through electronic payment channel or by means  of deposit / collection of cheques drawn by Central / State Government agencies  and departments;
While there will be no limit on the  number of deposits that can be made in a month, account holders will be allowed  a maximum of four withdrawals in a month, including ATM withdrawals; and
Facility of ATM card or ATM-cum Debit  Card;
The  above facilities will be provided without any charges. Further, no charge will  be levied for non-operation /activation of in-operative ‘Basic Savings Bank  Deposit Account’.
The  UCBs would be free to evolve other requirements including pricing structure for  additional value-added services beyond the stipulated basic minimum services on  reasonable and transparent basis and applied in a non-discriminatory manner.
The  ‘Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account’ would be subject to RBI instructions on  Know Your Customer (KYC) / Anti Money Laundering (AML) for opening of bank  accounts issued from time to time. If such account is opened on the basis of  simplified KYC norms, the account would additionally be treated as a ‘Small  Account’ and would be subject to conditions stipulated for such accounts as indicated  in paragraph 2.6 (iii) of Master Circular UBD.BPD.(PCB).MC.No.16  /12.05.001/2013-14 dated July 1, 2014 on KYC Norms /AML Measures /CFT /Obligations  of banks under PMLA, 2002.
Holders of ‘Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account’  will not be eligible for opening any other savings bank deposit account in that  bank. If a customer has any other existing savings bank deposit account in that  bank, he /she will be required to close it within 30 days from the date of  opening a ‘Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account’.
The  existing basic banking ‘no-frills’ accounts should be converted to ‘Basic  Savings Bank Deposit account’. However, financial inclusion objectives would  not be fully met if the banks do not increase the banking outreach to the  remote corners of the country. This has to be done with affordable  infrastructure and low operational costs with the use of appropriate  technology. This would enable banks to lower the transaction costs to make  small ticket transactions viable. Banks are, therefore, urged to scale up their  financial inclusion efforts by utilising appropriate technology. Care must be  taken to ensure that the solutions developed are highly secure, amenable to  audit and follow widely accepted open standards to allow inter-operability  among the different systems adopted by different banks.
In  view of several queries received in respect of ‘Basic Savings Bank  Deposit Account’, a list of “Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)” on the subject is  available in the RBI website under the “FAQs” tab.
2.5 Opening  of NRO/NRE accounts
2.5.1 UCBs may  maintain NRO accounts arising from their redesignation as such, upon the  existing resident account holders becoming non-resident and in such accounts  only, periodical credit of interest will be permitted. UCBs are not permitted  to open any fresh NRO accounts (with the exception of Category I Authorized  Dealers).
2.5.2 UCBs are advised to ensure compliance to  the following guidelines for opening bank accounts of foreign students studying  in India,  who are not able to provide an immediate address proof while approaching a bank  for opening bank accounts.
UCBs may open a Non Resident  Ordinary (NRO) bank account of a foreign student on the basis of his/her  passport (with appropriate visa & immigration endorsement) which contains  the proof of identity and address in the home country along with a photograph  and a letter offering admission from the educational institution.
Within a period of 30 days of opening the account, the  foreign student should submit to the branch where the account is opened, a  valid address proof giving local address, in the form of a rent agreement or a  letter from the educational institution as a proof of living in a facility  provided by the educational institution. UCBs should not insist on the landlord  visiting the branch for verification of rent documents and alternative means of  verification of local address may be adopted by banks.
During the 30-day period, the account should be operated  with a condition of allowing foreign remittances not exceeding USD 1,000.00  into the account and a cap of monthly withdrawal to Rs. 50,000.00 pending  verification of address.
On submission of the proof of current address, the account  would be treated as a normal NRO account, and will be operated in terms of  instructions contained in RBI’s Master Circular on Non-Resident Ordinary Rupee  (NRO) Account issued by our Foreign Exchange Department, Central Office and the  provisions of
Schedule 3 of FEMA Notification 5/2000 RB dated May 3, 2000
may also be kept in view.
Students with Pakistani nationality will need prior approval  of Reserve Bank of India  for opening the account.
2.5.3 UCBs registered  in States that have entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with  Reserve Bank of India (Reserve Bank) for supervisory and regulatory  co-ordination and those registered under the Multi State Co-operative Societies  Act, 2002 and complying with the following norms are eligible for authorization  to maintain NRE accounts.
Minimum net worth of Rs 25 crore.
CRAR of not less than 9%.
Net NPAs to be less than 10%
Compliance with CRR/SLR requirements.
Net profit for preceding three years  without any accumulated   losses.
Sound internal control systems.
Satisfactory compliance with KYC/AML  guidelines.
Presence of at least two  professional directors on the Board.
3. RESTRICTIONS  ON OPENING OF CERTAIN TYPES OF DEPOSIT ACCOUNTS
3.1 Deposit schemes  with lock-in period
It  has been brought to notice of the Reserve Bank that some banks are offering  special term deposit products to customers, in addition to regular term  deposits, ranging from 300 days to five years, with the following features:
Lock-in periods ranging from 6 to 12  months;
Premature withdrawal is not  permitted during the lock-in period. In case premature withdrawal is allowed  during the lock-in period, no interest is paid;
Rates of interest offered on these  deposits are not in tune with the rates of interest on normal deposits and
Part pre-payment is allowed by some  banks subject to certain conditions.
Before  launching new domestic deposit mobilisation schemes with the approval of their  respective Boards, UCBs should ensure that the provisions of Reserve Bank’s  directives on interest rates on deposits, premature withdrawal of term  deposits, sanction of loans/advances against term deposits, etc., issued from  time to time, are strictly adhered to. Any violation in this regard will be  viewed seriously and may attract penalty under the Banking Regulation Act, 1949  (As Applicable to Co-operative Societies). It is clarified that the special  schemes, with lock-in periods and other features referred to above, which have  been floated by some banks, are not in conformity with Reserve Bank’s  instructions. Banks that have floated such deposit schemes are, therefore,  advised to discontinue the schemes with immediate effect and report compliance  to Regional Office concerned of Reserve Bank.
3.2 Opening of  Bank Accounts in the Names of Minors
With a view to promoting the objective  of financial inclusion and also to bring uniformity among banks in opening and  operating minors’ accounts, banks are advised as under:
A savings /fixed / recurring bank  deposit account can be opened by a minor of any age through his/her natural or  legally appointed guardian.
Minors above the age of 10 years may  be allowed to open and operate savings bank accounts independently, if they so  desire. Banks may, however, keeping in view their risk management systems, fix  limits in terms of age and amount up to which minors may be allowed to operate  their deposit accounts independently. They can also decide, in their own  discretion, as to what minimum documents are required for opening of accounts  by minors.
On attaining majority, the erstwhile  minor should confirm the balance in his/her account and if the account is  operated by the natural guardian / legal guardian, fresh operating instructions  and specimen signature of erstwhile minor should be obtained and kept on record  for all operational purposes.
UCBs are free to offer additional  banking facilities like internet banking, ATM/ debit card, cheque book facility  etc., subject to the safeguards that minor accounts are not allowed to be  overdrawn and that these always remain in credit.
3.3 Minor's Account with Mother as Guardian
3.3.1 Generally, the  banks are reluctant to open deposit account in the name of minor, with mother  as a guardian. Presumably, reluctance to allow mother as a guardian when the  father is alive, is based on section 6 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship  Act, 1956 which stipulates that, during his lifetime, father alone should be  the natural guardian of a Hindu minor.
3.3.2 The legal and  practical aspects of the problem have been examined by the Reserve Bank. If the  idea underlying the demand for allowing mothers to be treated as guardians  related only to the opening of fixed, recurring deposit and savings banks  accounts, notwithstanding the legal provisions, such accounts could be opened  by banks provided they take adequate safeguards in allowing operations in the  accounts by ensuring that minors' account opened with mothers as guardians are  not allowed to be overdrawn and that they always remain in credit. In this way,  the minor's capacity to enter into contract would not be a subject matter of  dispute.
3.3.3 Further,  in cases where the amount involved is large, and if the minor  is old enough to understand the nature of the  transaction, the banks could take his acceptance also for paying out money from  such account.
4.
NOMINATION FACILITIES
4.
1 OPERATIONAL INSTRUCTIONS
Nomination facility should be made  available to all types of deposit accounts, irrespective of the nomenclature  used by different banks.
Unless the customer prefers not to nominate,  (this may be recorded, without giving scope for conjecture of non-compliance)  nomination should be a rule, to cover all existing and new accounts.
Nomination facility is available for  saving bank accounts opened for credit of pension. However, Co-operative Societies  (Nomination) Rules, 1985, are distinct from the Arrears of Pension (Nomination)  Rules, 1983, and the nomination exercised by the pensioner under the latter  Rules for receipt of arrears of pension will not be valid for the purpose of  deposit accounts held by the pensioners with banks for which a separate  nomination is necessary in terms of Co-operative Societies (Nomination) Rules,  1985, in case a pensioner desires to avail of nomination facility.
Banks are advised to generally  insist that the person opening a deposit account makes a nomination. In case  the person opening an account declines to fill in nomination, the banks should  explain the advantages of nomination facility. If the person opening the  account still does not want to nominate, the banks should ask him to give a  specific letter to the effect that he does not want to make nomination. In case  the person opening the account declines to give such a letter, the bank should  record the fact on the account opening form and proceed with opening of the  account if otherwise found eligible. Under no circumstances, a bank should  refuse to open an account solely on the ground that the person opening the  account refused to nominate. This procedure should be adopted in respect of  deposit accounts in the name of Sole Proprietary Concerns also.
It is clarified that the various  nomination forms (DA1,  DA2, and DA3 for Bank Deposits, Forms SC1, SC2 and SC3 for articles in safe  custody and Forms SL1, SL1A, SL2, SL3 and SL3A for Safety Lockers) prescribed  under the Co-operative  Banks (Nomination) Rules, 1985, only Thumb-impression(s) shall be attested  by two witnesses. The signatures of the account holders need not be attested by  witnesses.Banks  are advised to ensure strict compliance of the said instructions
4.2
The Act  Provisions
Sections 45 ZA to 45 ZF of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949  (As Applicable to Co-operative Societies) provide,
inter alia
, for  the following matters:
to enable a co-operative bank to  make payment to the nominee of a deceased depositor, of the amount standing to  the credit of the depositor.
to enable a co-operative bank to  return the articles left by a deceased person in its safe custody to his nominee,  after making an inventory of the articles in the manner directed by the Reserve  Bank.
to enable a co-operative bank to  release the contents of a safety locker to the nominee, of the hirer of such  locker, in the event of the death of the hirer after making an inventory of the  contents of the safety locker in the manner directed by the Reserve Bank.
4.3
The Rules
The  Co-operative Banks (Nomination) Rules, 1985 provide for:
Nomination forms for deposit  accounts, articles kept in safe custody and the contents of safety lockers,
Forms for cancellation and variation  of the nomination,
Registration of nominations and  cancellation and variation of nominations, and matters related to the above.
The Nomination Rules in respect of Deposit Accounts provide  as under:
The nomination to be made by the  depositor or, as the case may be, all the depositors together in respect of a  deposit held by a co-operative bank to the credit of one or more individuals.
The said nomination may be made only  in respect of a deposit, which is held in the individual capacity of the  depositor and not in any representative capacity as the holder of an office or  otherwise.
Where the nominee is a minor, the  depositor or, as the case may be, all the depositors together, may, while  making the nomination, appoint another individual not being a minor, to receive  the amount of the deposit on behalf of the nominee in the event of the death of  the depositor or, as the case may be, all the depositors during the minority of  the nominee.
In the case of a deposit made in the name of a  minor, the nomination shall be made by a person-lawfully entitled to act on  behalf of the minor.
The cancellation of the said  nomination to be made by the depositor or, as the case may be, all the depositors  together.
A variation of the said nomination  to be made by the depositor or, as the case may be all the depositors together.
The said nomination shall be made in  favour of only one individual.
A nomination, cancellation of  nomination or variation of nomination may be made as aforesaid at any time  during which the deposit is held by a co-operative bank to the credit of the  depositor or depositors, as the case may be.
In the case of a deposit held to the  credit of more than one depositor, the cancellation or variation of a  nomination shall not be valid unless it is made by all the depositors surviving  at the time of the cancellation or variation of the nomination.
The co-operative bank shall  acknowledge in writing, to the depositor or depositors concerned the filing of  the relevant duly completed Form of nomination or cancellation of nomination or  variation of nomination, as the case may be, in respect of a deposit.
The relevant duly completed Form of  Nomination or cancellation of nomination or variation of nomination filed with  the co-operative bank shall be registered in the books of the co-operative  bank.
A nomination or cancellation of  nomination or variation of nomination shall not cease to be in force merely by  reason of the renewal of the deposit.
4.4 Record of Nomination
4.4.1 Acknowledgement of Nomination
In terms of Rules 2 (9), 3 (8) and 4 (9) of the Co-operative  Banks (Nomination) Rules 1985, banks are required to acknowledge in writing to  the depositor(s) / locker hirers (s) the filing of the relevant duly completed  Form of nomination, cancellation and / or variation of the nomination. Banks  are advised to strictly comply with the provisions of Banking Regulation Act,  1949 (As Applicable to Co-operative Societies) and Co-operative Banks (Nomination)  Rules, 1985 and devise a proper system of acknowledging the receipt of the duly  completed form of nomination, cancellation and / or variation of the  nomination. Such acknowledgement should be given to all the customers  irrespective of whether the same is demanded by the customers. Further, in  addition to the legend “Nomination Registered”, they should also indicate the  name of the Nominee in the Pass Books / Statement of Accounts / Fixed Deposit  Receipts, in case the customer is agreeable to the same.
4.4.2 Registration of Nomination
The  Rules 2(10), 3(9) and 4(10) require a bank to register in its books the  nomination, cancellation and/or variation of the nomination. The banks should  accordingly take action to register nominations or changes therein, if any,  made by their depositor(s) hirer(s) of lockers.
The  following aspects may be adhered to while recording nominations:
In addition to obtaining nomination  form, banks may provide for mentioning name and address of the nominee in the  account opening form. Publicity about nomination facility is needed, including  printing compatible message on chequebook, passbook and any other literature  reaching the customer as well as launching periodical drives to popularise the  facility.
In case of joint deposits, after the  death of one of the depositors, the banks may allow variation/cancellation of a  subsisting nomination by other surviving depositor (s) acting together. This is  also applicable to deposits having operating instructions “either or survivor”.  It may be noted that in the case of a joint deposit account, the nominee’s  right arises only after the death of all the depositors.
The banks may introduce a practice  of recording on the face of the pass book the position regarding availment of  nomination facility with the legend ‘Nomination Registered’. This may be done  in the case of term deposit receipts also.
4.5 Nomination Facility in respect of Articles in Safe Custody
4.5.1 Legal  Provisions
The legal provisions providing for nomination and return of  articles kept in safe custody to the nominee and protection against notice of  claims of other persons are detailed in Sections 45 ZC and 45 ZD of Banking  Regulation Act, 1949 (As Applicable to Co-operative Societies).
4.5.2 Nomination Rules in respect  of Articles in Safe Custody
The Nomination Rules in respect of articles kept in safe  custody provides as under:
The nomination to be made by an  individual (hereinafter referred to as the “depositor”) in respect of articles  left in safe custody with a co-operative bank.
Where the nominee is minor, the  depositor may, while making the nomination, appoint another individual not  being a minor, to receive the said articles on behalf of the nominee in the  event of the death of the depositor during the minority of the nominee.
Where the articles are left in safe  custody with a co-operative bank in the name of a minor, the nomination shall  be made by a person lawfully entitled to act on behalf of the minor.
The nomination should be made in favour  of only one individual.
A nomination, cancellation of  nomination or variation of nomination may be made by the depositor at any time  during which the articles so deposited are held in safe custody by the  co-operative bank.
The co-operative bank should  acknowledge in writing, to the depositor, the filing of the relevant duly  completed Form of nomination or cancellation of nomination or variation of  nomination, as the case may be, in respect of the articles so deposited.
The duly completed Form of nomination or  cancellation of nomination or variation of nomination filed with the  co-operative bank should be registered in the books of the co-operative bank.
4.5.3 Operational Instructions
Nomination facilities are available  only in the case of individual depositors and not in respect of persons jointly  depositing articles for safe custody.
While returning articles kept in  safe custody to the nominee or nominees and surviving hirers, banks are not  required to open sealed/closed packets left with them for safe custody while  releasing them.
In the matter of returning articles  left in safe custody by the deceased depositor to the nominee, the Reserve  Bank, in pursuance of sections 45 ZC(3) and 45 ZE(4), read with section 56, of  the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (As Applicable to Co-operative Societies), has  specified the formats for the purpose.
In order to ensure that the articles  left in safe custody are returned to the genuine nominee, as also to verify the  proof of death, co-operative banks may devise their own claim formats or follow  the procedure, if any, suggested for the purpose either by their own  federation/association or by the Indian Banks' Association (IBA). As regards  proof of death of depositor, the IBA has advised its member banks to follow the  procedures as prevalent in banks viz. production of the death certificate or  any other satisfactory mode of proof of death.
4.6 Nomination in respect of Safe Deposit Locker Accounts
4.6.1 Legal Provisions
The  legal provisions providing for nomination and release of contents of safety  lockers to the nominee and protection against notice of claims of other persons  are detailed in Sections 45 ZE and 45 ZF of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949  (As Applicable to Co-operative Societies).
4.6.2 The Nomination Rules in respect of Safety  Locker
The Nomination Rules in respect of Safety Lockers provide as  under:
Where the locker is hired from a  co-operative bank by two or more individuals jointly, the nomination to be made  by such hirers.
In the case of a sole hirer of a  locker, nomination shall be made in favour of only one individual.
Where the locker is hired in the  name of a minor, the nomination shall be made by a person lawfully entitled to  act on behalf of the minor.
The cancellation of the said  nomination to be made by the sole hirer or, as the case may be, joint hirers of  a locker.
A variation of the said nomination  to be made by the sole hirer of a locker.
A variation of the said nomination  to be made by the joint hirers of a locker.
A nomination, cancellation of  nomination or variation of nomination may be made as aforesaid at any time  during which the locker is under hire.
A co-operative bank shall  acknowledge in writing to the sole hirer or joint hirers, the filling of the  relevant duly completed Form of nomination or cancellation of nomination or  variation of nomination, as the case may be, in respect of the locker so hired.
The relevant duly completed Form of  nomination or cancellation of nomination or variation of nomination filed with  the co-operative bank shall be registered in the books of the co-operative  bank.
4.6.3 Operational Instructions
In the matter of allowing the  nominee(s) to have access to the locker and permitting him/them to remove the  contents of the locker, the Reserve Bank, in pursuance of sections 45 ZC(3) and  45 ZE (4), read with section 56, of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, has  specified the Formats for Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
In order to ensure that the amount  of deposits, articles left in safe custody and contents of lockers are returned  to the genuine nominee, banks may take action as indicated in paragraph 4.5.3  (iv) above.
While releasing contents of lockers  to the nominee or nominees and surviving hirers, banks are not required to open  sealed/closed packets found in locker.
As regards locker hired jointly, on  the death of any one of the joint hirers, the contents of the locker are only  allowed to be removed (jointly by the nominee and the survivors) after an  inventory is taken in the prescribed manner.  In such a case, after such  removal preceded by an inventory, the nominee and surviving hirer(s) may still  keep the entire contents with the same bank, if they so desire by entering into  a fresh contract of hiring a locker.
Section 45 ZE, read with section 56 of the  Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (As Applicable to Co-operative Societies), does  not preclude a minor from being a nominee for obtaining delivery of the  contents of a locker.  However, the responsibility of the banks in such  cases is to ensure that when the contents of a locker are   sought to  be removed on behalf of the minor nominee, the articles are handed over to a  person who, in law, is competent to receive the articles on behalf of the  minor.
5. OPERATIONS  IN ACCOUNTS
5.1 Joint Accounts
5.1.1 Modes of Operations in Joint Accounts
A copy of the letter No.  LA.C/19-96-29 dated 28 August 1980, received from the IBA is given in the
Annex  I
. Banks may consider the desirability of issuing suitable instructions to  their branches for their information and necessary guidance on the subject.
If fixed/term deposit accounts are  opened with operating instructions ‘Either or Survivor’, the signatures of both  the depositors need not be obtained for payment of the amount of the deposits  on maturity. However, the signatures of both the depositors may have to be  obtained, in case the deposit is to be paid before maturity. If the operating  instruction is ‘Either or Survivor’ and one of the depositors expires before  the maturity, no pre-payment of the fixed /term deposit may be allowed without  the concurrence of the legal heirs of the deceased joint holder. This, however,  would not stand in the way of making payment to the survivor on maturity.
In case the mandate is ‘Former or  Survivor’, the ‘Former’ alone can operate /withdraw the matured amount of the  fixed term deposit, when both the depositors are alive. However, the signature  of both the depositors may have to be obtained, in case the deposit is to be  paid before maturity. If the former expires before the maturity of the fixed  /term deposit, the ‘Survivor’ can withdraw the deposit on maturity. Premature  withdrawal would however require the consent of both the parties, when both of  them are alive, and that of the surviving depositor and the legal heirs of the  deceased in case of death of one of the depositors.
If the joint depositors prefer to  allow premature withdrawals of fixed / term deposits also in accordance with  the mandate of ‘Either or Survivor’ or ‘Former or Survivor’, as the case may  be, it would be open to banks to do so, provided they have taken a specific  joint mandate from the depositors for the said purpose.
5.1.2 Precautions in Opening Joint Accounts
(i) In the case of  too many joint account holders, the banks should keep the following guidelines  in view, while opening joint accounts and permitting operations thereon:
While there are no restrictions on  the number of account holders in a joint account, it is incumbent upon the  banks to examine, every request for opening joint accounts very carefully. In  particular, the purpose, nature of business handled by the parties and other  relevant aspects relating to the business, and the financial position of the  account holders, need to be looked into before opening such accounts. Care has  also to be exercised when the number of account holders is large.
The  account payee cheques payable to third parties  should not be collected.
Cheques that are “crossed generally”  and payable to "order" should be collected only on proper endorsement  by the payee.
Care should be exercised in  collection of cheques for large amounts.
The transactions put through in  joint accounts should be scrutinised by the banks periodically and action taken  as may be appropriate in the matter. Care should be exercised to ensure that  the joint accounts are not used for
benami
transactions.
(ii) The internal  control and vigilance machinery should be tightened to cover the above aspects  relating to the opening and operation of joint accounts.
5.2 Monitoring  Operations in New Accounts
5.2.1 A system of  maintaining a close watch over the operations in new accounts should be  introduced. While at branches, primarily the responsibility for monitoring  newly opened accounts would rest with the in-charges of the concerned  Department/Section, the Branch Managers or the Managers of Deposit Accounts Department  at larger branches should at least for the first six months, from the date  of opening of such accounts, keep a close watch, so as to guard against  fraudulent or doubtful transactions taking place therein. If any transaction of  suspicious nature is revealed, banks should enquire about the transaction from  the account holder, and if no convincing explanation is forthcoming, they  should consider reporting such transactions to the appropriate investigating  agencies.
5.2.2 Caution should  be exercised whenever cheques/ drafts for large amounts are presented for  collection, or Telegraphic Transfers (TTs)/Mail Transfers (MTs) are received  for credit of new accounts immediately/within a short period after opening of  account. In such cases, genuineness of the instruments and the account holder  should be thoroughly verified. If necessary the paying bank should check with  the collecting bank about the genuineness of any large value cheques/drafts  issued. Demand Drafts (DDs)/Cheques for large amounts presented for collection  should be verified under ultra violet lamps to safe guard against chemical  alterations.
5.3
Monitoring Operations in all Accounts
5.3.1 A system of  close monitoring of cash withdrawal for large amounts should be put in place.  Where third party cheques, drafts, etc. are deposited in the existing and newly  opened accounts followed by cash withdrawals for large amounts, the banks  should keep a proper vigil over the requests of their clients for such cash  withdrawals for large amounts.
5.3.2 The banks should introduce a system of closely  monitoring cash deposits and withdrawals for Rs. 5 lakh and above not only in  deposit accounts but also in all other accounts like cash credit/overdraft etc.  The banks/branches should also maintain a separate register to record details  of individual cash deposits and withdrawals for Rs. 5 lakh and above. The  details recorded should include, in the case of deposits, the name of the  account holder, account number, amount deposited and in the case of  withdrawals, the name of the account holder, account number, amount of  withdrawal and name of the beneficiary of the cheque. Further, any cash  deposits or withdrawals of Rs. 5 lakh and above should be reported by the  Branch Manager to the Head Office on a fortnightly basis along with full  particulars, such as name of the account holder, account number, date of  opening the account, etc. On receipt of these statements from branches, the  Head Office should immediately scrutinise the details thereof and have the  transactions looked into by deputing officials, if the transactions prima facie  appear to be dubious or giving rise to suspicion. The inspecting officials from  the Reserve Bank during the course of their inspections will also be looking  into the statements submitted by the branches.
5.3.3 The other important areas in the payment of cheques  wherein due caution need to be exercised are verification of drawer's  signature, custody of specimen signature cards, supervision over issue of  cheque books and control over custody of blank cheque books/leaves. While need  for examining cheques for large amounts under Ultra Violet Ray Lamps is  recognised by all banks, in practice it is rarely done as there is often a  tendency to be lax in the matter resulting in avoidable loss. In addition, due  care should be exercised in regard to issue and custody of tokens, movement of  cheques tendered across the counter and custody of all instruments after they  are paid by the banks. Depositors/ Customers should be asked to surrender  unused cheque books before closing/transferring the accounts. Also safe custody  of specimen signature cards is of utmost importance, especially when operating  instructions are changed, the change should be duly verified by a senior  official in the branch.
5.4 Issue of Cheque  Books
Fresh  cheque books should be issued only against production of duly signed  requisition slips from previous cheque book issued to the party. In case the  cheque book is issued against a requisition letter, the drawer should be asked  to come personally to the bank or cheque book should be sent to him under  registered post directly without being delivered to the bearer. Loose cheques  should be issued to account holder only when they come personally with a  requisition letter and on production of passbooks.
5.5 Unclaimed  Deposits and Inoperative/ Dormant Accounts
In  view of the increase in the amount of unclaimed deposits with banks year after  year and the inherent risk associated with such deposits, it is felt that banks  should play a more pro-active role in finding the whereabouts of the account  holders whose accounts have remained inoperative. Moreover, there is a feeling  that banks are undeservedly enjoying the unclaimed deposits, while paying no  interest on it. Keeping these factors in view, UCBs may follow the instructions  detailed below while dealing with inoperative/dormant accounts:
UCBs should carry out an annual  review of accounts in which there are no operations (i.e. no credit or debit  other than crediting of periodic interest or debiting of service charges) for  more than one year. The banks may approach the customers and inform them in  writing that there has been no operation in their accounts and ascertain the  reasons for the same. In case the non-operation in the account is due to shifting  of the customers from the locality, they may be asked to provide the details of  the new bank accounts to which the balance in the existing account could be  transferred.
If the letters are returned  undelivered, they may immediately be put on enquiry to find out the whereabouts  of customers or their legal heirs in case they are deceased.
In case the whereabouts of the  customers are not traceable, banks should consider contacting the persons who  had introduced the account holder. They could also consider contacting the  employer / or any other person whose details are available with them. They  could also consider contacting the account holder telephonically in case his  telephone number / Cell number has been furnished to the bank. In case of Non  Resident accounts, the bank may also contact the account holders through email  and obtain their confirmation of the details of the account.
A savings as well as current account  should be treated as inoperative / dormant if there are no transactions in the  account for over a period of two years.
In case any reply is given by the  account holder giving the reasons for not operating the account, banks should  continue classifying the same as an operative account for one more year within  which period the account holder may be requested to operate the account.  However, in case the account holder still does not operate the same during the  extended period, banks should classify the same as inoperative account after  the expiry of the extended period.
For the purpose of classifying an  account as 'inoperative' both the type of transactions i.e. debit as well as  credit transactions induced at the instance of customers as well as third party  should be considered. However, the service charges levied by the bank or  interest credited by the bank should not be considered. There may be instances  where the customer has given a mandate for crediting the interest in Fixed  Deposit account to the Savings Bank account and there are no other operations  in the Savings Bank account. Since the interest on Fixed Deposit account is  credited in the Savings Bank accounts as per the mandate of the customer, the  same could be treated as a customer induced transaction and the account should  be treated as operative account as long as the interest on Fixed Deposit  account is credited to the Savings Bank account. The Savings Bank account can  be treated as inoperative only after two years from the date of the last credit  entry of the interest on Fixed Deposit account.
Further, the segregation of the  inoperative accounts is from the point of view of reducing risk of frauds etc.  However, the customer should not be inconvenienced in any way, just because his  account has been rendered inoperative. The classification is there only to  bring to the attention of dealing staff, the increased risk in the account. The  transaction may be monitored at a higher level both from the point of view of  preventing fraud and making a Suspicious Transactions Report. However, the  entire process should remain un-noticeable by the customer.
Operation in such accounts may be  allowed after due diligence as per risk category of the customer. Due diligence  would mean ensuring genuineness of the transaction, verification of the  signature and identity etc. However, it has to be ensured that the customer is  not inconvenienced as a result of extra care taken by the bank.
There should not be any charge for  activation of inoperative account.
Banks are also advised to ensure  that the amounts lying in inoperative accounts ledger are properly audited by  the internal auditors / statutory auditors of the bank.
Interest on savings bank accounts  should be credited on regular basis whether the account is operative or not. If  a Fixed Deposit Receipt matures and proceeds are unpaid, the amount left  unclaimed with the bank will attract savings bank rate of interest.
State and Central Governments have  expressed difficulties in crediting cheques / Direct Benefit Transfer /  Electronic Benefit Transfer / Scholarships for students, etc. into accounts  opened for the beneficiaries under various Central / State Government schemes,  but had been classified as dormant / inoperative due to non-operation of the  account for over two years. UCBs are, therefore, advised that they may allot a  different "product code" in their CBS to all such accounts opened by  banks so that the stipulation of inoperative / dormant account due to  non-operation does not apply, while crediting proceeds as mentioned  above. In order to reduce the risk of fraud  etc., in such accounts, while allowing operations in these accounts, due  diligence should be exercised by ensuring the genuineness of transactions,  verification of signature and identity, etc. However, care may be taken to  ensure that the customer is not inconvenienced in any manner.
Banks are not permitted to levy  penal charges for non-maintenance of minimum balances in any inoperative  account.
5.6 The Depositor  Education and Awareness Fund Scheme, 2014
Pursuant  to the amendment of the Banking  Regulation Act, 1949, section 26A has been inserted in the Act,  empowering Reserve Bank to establish The Depositor Education and Awareness Fund  (the Fund). Accordingly, the Scheme, which is given in
Annex II
has been  notified in the Official Gazette on May 24, 2014. As per paragraph 3(vi) of the  Scheme, banks shall calculate the cumulative balances in all accounts along  with interest accrued, as on the day prior to the effective date, i.e May 23,  2014 and such amounts due should be transferred to the Depositor Education and  Awareness Fund (Fund) on June 30, 2014 (before the close of banking hours).  Subsequently, as mentioned in paragraph 3(vii) of the Scheme, banks shall  transfer to the Fund the amounts becoming due in each calendar month (i.e.  proceeds of the inoperative accounts and balances remaining unclaimed for ten  years or more) as specified in the Scheme and the interest accrued thereon on  the last working day of the subsequent month. Detailed instructions regarding  crediting amount to the Fund, returns to be submitted to RBI, etc. are given in   Annex II  (a)
5.7 Operation of  Bank Accounts by Old/Sick/Incapacitated Customers
5.7.1 In order to facilitate  old/sick/incapacitated bank customers to operate their bank accounts, procedure  as laid down in paragraph 5.8.2 below may be followed. The cases of  sick/old/incapacitated account holders fall into the following categories:
an account holder who is too ill to  sign a cheque/cannot be physically present in the bank to withdraw money from  his bank account but can put his/her thumb impression on the cheque/withdrawal  form, and
an account holder who is not only  unable to be physically present in the bank but is also not even able to put  his/her thumb impression on the cheque/withdrawal form due to certain physical  defect/incapacity.
5.7.2 The banks may follow the procedure as  under:
Wherever thumb or toe impression of  the sick/old/incapacitated account holder is obtained, it should be identified  by two independent witnesses known to the bank, one of whom should be a  responsible bank official.
Where the customer cannot even put  his/her thumb impression and also would not be able to be physically present in  the bank, a mark obtained on the cheque/withdrawal form which should be identified  by two independent witnesses, one of whom should be a responsible bank  official.
5.7.3 In such cases,  the customer may be asked to indicate to the bank as to  who would withdraw the amount from the bank on  the basis of cheque/withdrawal form as obtained above and that person should be  identified by two independent witnesses. The person who would be actually  drawing the money from the bank should be asked to furnish his signature to the  bank.
5.7.4 In this  context, according to an opinion obtained by the IBA from their consultant on  the question of opening of a bank account of a person who had lost both his  hands and could not sign the cheque/withdrawal form, there must be physical  contact between the person who is to sign and the signature or the mark put on  the document. Therefore, in the case of the person who has lost both his hands,  the signature can be by means of a mark. This mark can be placed by the person  in any manner. It could be the toe impression, as suggested. It can be by means  of mark which anybody can put on behalf of the person who has to sign, the mark  being put by an instrument which has had a physical contact with the person who  has to sign.
5.7.5 Legal Guardianship Certificates issued under  the Mental Health Act, 1987 and National trust for the Welfare of Persons with  Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999
The Mental Health Act, 1987 provides  for a law relating to the treatment    and  care of mentally ill persons and to make better provision with respect to their  property and affairs. According to the said Act, “mentally ill person” means a  person who is in need of treatment by reason of any mental disorder other than  mental retardation. Sections 53 and 54 of this Act provide for the appointment  of guardians for mentally ill persons and in certain cases, managers in respect  of their property. The prescribed appointing authorities are the district  courts and collectors of districts under the Mental Health Act, 1987.
The National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism,  Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999 provides  for a law relating to certain specified disabilities. Clause (j) of Section 2  of that Act defines a “person with disability” to mean a person suffering from  any of the conditions relating to autism, cerebral palsy, mental retardation or  a combination of any two or more of such conditions and includes a person  suffering from severe multiple disabilities. This Act empowers a Local Level  Committee to appoint a guardian to a person with disabilities, who shall have  the care of the person and property of the disabled person.
Banks may also ensure that their branches give proper  guidance so that the parents / relatives of the disabled persons do not face  any difficulty in this regard.
5.8 Receipt of  Foreign Contributions by various Associations / Organisations in India under  Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976
5.8.1 The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, requires  that the associations having a definite cultural, economic, educational,  religious and social programme and receiving foreign contribution should get  themselves registered with the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India  and receive foreign contribution only through such one of the branches of a  bank, as an association may specify in its application for registration with  the Ministry of Home Affairs.
5.8.2 Further, the said Act provides that every association  referred to in sub-section (1) of Section (6) may, if it is not registered with  the Central Government, accept any foreign contribution only after obtaining  prior permission of the Central Government.
5.8.3 There are also certain organisations of a political  nature, not being political parties (including their branches/units) specified  by the Central Government under Section 5(l) of the Act. These organisations  require prior Permission of the Central Government for accepting any foreign  contribution. In this regard, the banks should take the following precautions:
To afford credit of the proceeds of  cheques/drafts representing foreign contribution only if the association is  registered with the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India.
To insist on production of a  communication from the Ministry of Home Affairs conveying prior permission of  the Central Government for acceptance of specific amount of foreign  contribution in case the association is not registered under the Foreign  Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976.
Not to afford credit to the account  of such associations as are not registered with the Ministry of Home Affairs  separately for the purpose of accepting foreign contribution under the Foreign  Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976.
Not to afford credit to the account  of such associations as have been directed to receive foreign contributions  only after obtaining prior permission of the Central Government.
Not to allow the credit of the  proceeds of the cheques/ demand drafts etc. to the organisations of a political  nature, not being political parties (including their branches and units) unless  a letter containing the prior permission of the Central Government under the  Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976 is produced by such organisations.
To note the registration number as  conveyed by the Ministry of Home Affairs to the various associations in the  relevant records particularly the pages of the ledgers in which the foreign  contribution accounts of associations are maintained to ensure that no unwanted  harassment is caused to such associations.
In case any cheque/demand draft has  been tendered to the bank for realisation of its proceeds and credit to the  account of the association/organisation by an association or organisation which  is not registered or which requires prior permission, as the case may be, the concerned  branch of the bank may approach the Ministry of Home Affairs for further  instructions. In no case the banks should credit the account of  association/organisation of a political nature, not being a political party, as  specified by the Central Government and of an unregistered association, unless  the association/ organisation produces a letter of the Ministry of Home Affairs  conveying permission of the Central Government to accept the foreign  contribution.
Where prior permission has been  granted such permission is to accept only the specific amount of the foreign  contribution which would be mentioned in the relevant letter. The Ministry of  Home Affairs is invariably endorsing a copy of the order of registration or  prior permission for each association/organisation to the concerned branch of  the bank through which the foreign contributions are to be received for credit  to the Associations/ Organisations deposit account.
5.8.4 For the above purpose, appropriate systems  may be devised within the bank to ensure meticulous compliance with these  instructions and completely eliminate instances of non-compliance. The system  so devised may be intimated to all the branches of the bank for proper  implementation and strict compliance and the same should be effectively  monitored at Head Office level.
5.8.5 The Ministry of Home  Affairs (MHA), Government of India has developed software for submission of  online reports of receipt of foreign contribution by banks. MHA has advised  that submitting reports online through software would be optional till October  31, 2013. However, from November 1, 2013 onwards, online submission of report  would be compulsory. UCBs are advised to access
http://mha1.nic.in/fcra.htm
website for  all the details on FCRA reporting and the user guide can be accessed at
http://mha1.nic.in/pdfs/USERGuideBank-270813.pdf
.
5.8.6 Non-adherence to these instructions will tantamount to  violation of the provisions of the said Act. Even non-submission of the  prescribed Return in time to the Government of India would be viewed very  seriously.
6
. SETTLEMENT OF CLAIMS  IN RESPECT OF DECEASED DEPOSITORS
Urban  Co-operative Banks are advised to instruct all their branches to adhere to the  extant instructions on the subject to facilitate expeditious and hassle free  settlement of claims on the death of a depositor. With a view to facilitating  timely settlement of claims on the death of a depositor, banks are advised to  provide claim forms for settlement of claims of the deceased’s account(s), to  any person/s who is /are approaching the bank /branches for this. Urban  Co-operative Banks having website may also place the claim forms on their  website prominently so that claimants of the deceased depositor can access and  download the forms without their having to visit the concerned bank / branch  for obtaining such forms for filing claim with the bank.
To  facilitate expeditious and hassle-free settlement of claims on the death of a  depositor, the following guidelines may be followed:
Access to balance in deposit accounts
6.1 Accounts with survivor/ nominee clause
In  the case of deposit accounts where the depositor had utilised the nomination  facility and made a valid nomination or where the account was opened with the  survivorship clause ("either or survivor", or "anyone or  survivor", or "former or survivor" or "latter or  survivor"), the payment of the balance in the deposit account to the  survivor(s)/nominee of a deceased deposit account holder represents a valid  discharge of the bank's liability
provided
:
the bank has exercised due care and caution in establishing  the identity of the survivor(s) / nominee and the fact of death of the account  holder, through appropriate documentary evidence;
there is no order from the competent court restraining the  bank from making the payment from the account of the deceased; and
it has been made clear to the survivor(s) / nominee that he  would be receiving the payment from the bank as a trustee of the legal heirs of  the deceased depositor, i.e., such payment to him shall not affect the right or  claim which any person may have against the survivor(s) / nominee to whom the  payment is made.
6.2 It may be noted  that since payment made to the survivor(s) / nominee, subject to the foregoing  conditions, would constitute a full discharge of the bank's liability,  insistence on production of legal representation is superfluous and unwarranted  and only serves to cause entirely avoidable inconvenience to the survivor(s) /  nominee and would, therefore, invite serious supervisory disapproval.  In  such case, therefore, while making payment to the survivor(s) / nominee of the  deceased depositor, the banks are advised to desist from insisting on production  of succession certificate, letter of administration or probate, etc., or obtain  any bond of indemnity or surety from the survivor(s)/nominee, irrespective of  the amount standing to the credit of the deceased account holder.
6.3 Accounts without  the survivor/ nominee clause
In case where the deceased depositor had not made any  nomination or for the accounts other than those styled as "either or  survivor" (such as single or jointly operated accounts), banks are advised  to adopt a simplified procedure for repayment to legal heir(s) of the depositor  keeping in view the imperative need to avoid inconvenience and undue hardship  to the common person.  In this context, banks may, keeping in view their  risk management systems, fix a minimum threshold limit, for the balance in the  account of the deceased depositors, up to which claims in respect of the  deceased depositors could be settled without insisting on production of any  documentation other than a letter of indemnity.
6.4 Premature  Termination of term deposit accounts
In case of term deposits with  “Either or Survivor” or “Former or Survivor” mandate, UCBs are permitted to  allow premature withdrawal of the deposit by the surviving joint depositor on  the death of the other, only if, there is a joint mandate from the joint  depositors to this effect.
UCBs which have neither incorporated such a clause in the  account opening form nor taken adequate measures to make the customers aware of  the facility of such mandate, cause unnecessary inconvenience to the  “surviving” deposit account holder (s). UCBs are, therefore, advised to  invariably incorporate the aforesaid clause in the account opening form and  also inform their existing as well as future term deposit holders about the  availability of such an option.
The joint deposit holders may be permitted to give the  mandate either at the time of placing fixed deposit or anytime subsequently  during the term /tenure of the deposit. If such a mandate is obtained, banks  can allow premature withdrawal of term /fixed deposits by the surviving  depositor without seeking the concurrence of the legal heirs of the deceased  joint deposit holder. Such premature withdrawal would not attract any penal  charge.
6.5
Treatment of flows  in the name of the deceased depositor
In  order to avoid hardship to the survivor(s) / nominee of a deposit account,  banks are advised to obtain appropriate agreement / authorization from the  survivor(s) / nominee with regard to the treatment of pipeline flows in the  name of the deceased account holder.  In this regard, banks could consider  adopting either of the following two approaches:
The bank could be authorized by the  survivor(s) / nominee of a deceased account holder to open an account styled as  'Estate of Shri ________________, the Deceased' where all the pipeline flows in  the name of the deceased account holder could be allowed to be credited,  provided no withdrawals are made.
OR
The bank could be authorized by the  survivor(s) / nominee to return the pipeline flows to the remitter with the remark  "Account holder deceased” and to intimate the survivor(s) / nominee  accordingly.  The survivor(s) / nominee / legal heir(s) could then  approach the remitter to effect payment through a negotiable instrument or  through ECS transfer in the name of the appropriate beneficiary.
6.6
Access to the safe  deposit lockers / safe custody articles
For  dealing with the requests from the nominee(s) of the deceased locker-hirer /  depositors of the safe-custody articles (where such a nomination had been made)  or by the survivor(s) of the deceased (where the locker / safe custody article  was accessible under the survivorship clause), for access to the contents of  the locker / safe custody article on the death of a locker hirer / depositor of  the article, the banks are advised to adopt generally the foregoing approach,
mutatis  mutandis,
as indicated for the deposit accounts. Detailed guidelines in  this regard are, however, being issued separately.
6.7
Time limit  for settlement of claims
Banks  are advised to settle the claims in respect of deceased depositors and release  payments to
survivor(s) / nominee(s) within a period not exceeding 15 days
from the date of receipt of the claim subject to the production of proof of  death of the depositor and suitable identification of the claim(s), to the  bank's satisfaction. Banks should report to the Customer Service Committee of  the Board, at appropriate intervals, on an ongoing basis, the details of the  number of claims received pertaining to deceased depositors / locker-hirers /  depositors of safe custody article accounts and those pending beyond the  stipulated period, giving reasons therefor.
6.8
Provisions of  the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (As Applicable to Co-operative Societies)
In  this connection, attention is also invited to the provisions of Sections 45 ZA  to 45 ZF read with Section 56 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (As  Applicable to Co-operative Societies) and the Co-operative Banks (Nomination)  Rules, 1985.
6.9
Customer Guidance and Publicity
Banks  are advised to give wide publicity and provide guidance to deposit account  holders on the benefits of the nomination facility and the survivorship  clause.  Illustratively, it should be highlighted in the publicity  material that in the event of the death of one of the joint account holders,  the right to the deposit proceeds does not automatically devolve on the  surviving joint deposit account holder, unless there is a survivorship clause.
7.
SETTLEMENT OF  CLAIMS IN RESPECT OF MISSING PERSONS
The  system which should be followed by banks in case a claim is received from a  nominee / legal heirs for settlement of claim in respect of missing persons is  as under:
The settlement of claims in respect  of missing persons would be governed by the provisions of Section 107 / 108 of  the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. Section 107 deals with presumption of  continuance and Section 108 deals with presumption of death. As per the  provisions of Section 108 of the Indian Evidence Act, presumption of death can  be raised only after a lapse of seven years from the date of his/her being  reported missing. As such, the nominee / legal heirs have to raise an express  presumption of death of the subscriber under Section 107/108 of the Indian  Evidence Act before a competent court. If the court presumes that he/she is  dead, then the claim in respect of a missing person can be settled on the basis  of the same.
Banks are advised to formulate a  policy, which would enable them to settle the claims of a missing person after  considering the legal opinion and taking into account the facts and  circumstances of each case. Further, keeping in view the imperative need to  avoid inconvenience and undue hardship to the common person, banks are advised  that keeping in view their risk management systems, they may fix a threshold  limit, up to which claims in respect of missing persons could be settled  without insisting on production of any documentation other than (i) FIR and the  non-traceable report issued by police authorities and (ii) letter of indemnity.
The Office of the Registrar General of India,  Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India has devised a procedure for  Registration of Death and issue of Death Certificate of Missing persons in  Natural Calamities affected areas in Uttarakhand  during June 14-20 vide its circular  F.No.1/2/(Uttarakhand)/ 2011-VS-CRS dated August 16, 2013 (MHA Circular). Urban  Co-operative Banks (UCBs)  are advised to settle the claims in respect of  missing persons, covered by MHA Circular, without insisting on production of  any documentation other than (i) the ‘Death Certificate’ issued by the  Designated Officer under MHA Circular and (ii) letter of indemnity.
UCBs are advised that the instructions  at paragraph (a) and (b) would be applicable in other cases which are not  covered by MHA Circular.
8. DEPOSIT  MOBILISATION
8.1 Deposit Collection Agents
8.1.1 Banks are  prohibited from paying brokerage on deposits in any form to any    individual, firm, company, association, institution or any other person.
8.1.2 Banks should not employ/engage outside persons even  through firms/ companies for collection of deposits including Non-Resident  deposits or for selling any other deposit linked products on payment of fees/  commission in any form or manner, except to the extent permitted vide Reserve  Bank’s Interest Rate Directives.
8.2 Acceptance of  Deposits by Unincorporated Bodies/ Private Ltd. Companies with ‘Bank Guarantee’
Banks should not accept deposits at the instance of private  financiers or unincorporated bodies under any arrangement, which provides for  either the issue of deposit receipts favouring the clients of private  financiers or giving of an authority by power of attorney, nomination otherwise  for such clients receiving such deposits at maturity.
8.3 Deposit Collection Schemes floated by Private  Organisations
It may be noted that the Prize Chits and Money  Circulation Schemes (Banning) Act, 1978 (No. 43 of 1978) imposes a total ban on  the promotion and conduct of prize chit scheme except by charitable and  educational institutions notified in that behalf by the State Governments  concerned. The lottery falls within the expression "prize chit" under  the Act referred to above. Further, sale of lottery tickets on bank counters  could be open to abuse and avoidable complaints from members of public.  Therefore, the banks should not associate themselves directly or indirectly  with lottery schemes of organisations of any description.
9.
Greater  Co-ordination between Banking System and Income-Tax Authorities
9.1 Safe  Deposit Lockers
In  order to facilitate the identification of locker keys by the Income-tax  officials, the banks should emboss on all locker keys an identification code  which would indicate the bank and the branch which had hired the lockers. In  case of already hired out lockers, banks should introduce a system whereby the  locker keys could be embossed with the identification code of the bank/branch  as and when the customer visits the branch for opening the locker. An  arrangement for installation of necessary machinery at the branches with the  help of the vendor company of the locker cabinet may be made for this purpose.  The branches concerned may advise all the locker hirers about the embossing of  the locker keys. It may also be ensured that the identification code is embossed  on the locker keys in the presence of the locker hirer only.
9.2 Co-ordination with Officers of Central  Board of Direct Taxes
There  is a need for greater co-ordination between the Income Tax Department and the  banking system. As such, the banks may ensure that they extend necessary  help/co-ordination to tax officials whenever required. Further, the banks will  have to view with serious concern cases where their staff connives/assists in  any manner with offences punishable under the Income Tax Act. In such cases, in  addition to the normal criminal action, such staff member should also be  proceeded against departmentally.
10.
‘KNOW YOUR CUSTOMER’ (KYC) GUIDELINES AND ANTI MONEY LAUNDERING  (AML) STANDARDS
Guidelines on KYC and AML standards have been consolidated  in the Master Circular on “KYC Norms / AML Standards / Combating of Financing  of Terrorism (CFT) / Obligation of Banks under PMLA, 2002 dated July 1, 2014.
As part of  KYC principle,  Reserve Bank has issued several   guidelines relating    to   identification  of depositors  and advised the   banks to  put in  place systems  and procedures  to   prevent financial  frauds, identify  money laundering  and   suspicious activities,  and   for  scrutiny/  monitoring   of  large   value   cash   transactions. Instructions have also been issued from time to time advising  banks to be vigilant while opening accounts for new customers to prevent misuse  of the banking system for perpetration of frauds.
Banks  are advised to ensure that a proper policy framework on KYC and AML measures is  formulated and put in place with the approval of the Board. While preparing  operational guidelines, banks may ensure that information sought from the  customer is relevant to the perceived risk, is not intrusive, and is conformity  with the guidelines issued in this regard from time to time.
Banks  are advised that only ‘mandatory information required for KYC purpose which the  customer is obliged to give while opening an account should be obtained at the  time of opening the account /during periodic updation. Other ‘optional’  customer details /additional information, if required may be obtained  separately only after the account is opened with the explicit consent of the  customer. Banks should keep in mind that the information (both ‘mandatory’ –  before opening the account as well as “optional” – after opening the account  with the explicit consent of the customer) collected from the customer is to be  treated as confidential and details thereof are not to be divulged for cross  selling or any other like purposes.
An
indicative list
of the  nature and type of documents/ information that may   be relied upon  for customer identification was given in the
Annex-II to the circular UBD.  PCB.Cir.30/09.161.00/2004-05 dated December 15, 2004
and updated from time to  time. The updated list is available in
Annex I
of the Master Circular on“KYC  Norms / AML Standards / Combating of Financing of Terrorism (CFT) / Obligation  of Banks under PMLA, 2002”. However, the list is being treated by some banks as  an exhaustive list as a result of which a section of public is being denied  access to banking services. Banks are advised to take a review of their extant  internal instructions in this regard.
It is clarified that permanent correct  address, as referred to in
Annex-II
of our said circular, means the address at  which a person usually resides and can be taken as the address as mentioned in  a utility bill or any other document accepted by the bank for verification of  the address of the customer. It has been observed that some close relatives,  e.g. wife, son, daughter and parents etc. who live with their husband,  father/mother and son, as the case may be, are finding it difficult to open  account in some banks as the utility bills required for address verification are  not in their name. In such cases, banks can obtain an identity document and a  utility bill of the relative with whom the prospective customer is living along  with a declaration from the relative that the said person (prospective  customer) wanting to open an account is a relative and is staying with him/her.  Banks can use any supplementary evidence such as a letter received through post  for further verification of the address.
To ease the burden on the prospective  customers in complying with KYC requirements for opening new accounts, it has  been decided that if the address on the document submitted for identity proof  by the prospective customer is same as that declared by him / her in the  account opening form, the document may be accepted as a valid proof of both  identity and address.
It  is advised that customers may submit only one documentary proof of address  (either current or permanent) while opening a bank account or while undergoing  periodic updation. In case the address mentioned as per ‘proof of address’  undergoes a change, fresh proof of address may be submitted to the branch  within a period of six months. For this purpose, apart from the indicative  documents listed in
Annex I
of the Master Circular on  KYC Norms /AML Measures/CFT / Obligations of Banks under Prevention of Money  Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002, a  rent agreement indicating the address of the customer duly registered with  State Government or similar registration authority may also be accepted as a  proof of address.
In case the proof of address furnished  by the customer is not the local address or address where the customer is  currently residing, the UCB may take a declaration of the local address on  which all correspondence will be made by them with the customer. No proof is  required to be submitted for such address for the purpose of correspondence.  This address may be verified by the bank through ‘positive confirmation’ such  as acknowledgment of receipt of (i) letters, cheque books, ATM card, (ii)  telephonic conversation, (iii) visits etc. In the event of change in this  address due to relocation or any other reason/s, customers may intimate the new  address for correspondence to the UCB within two weeks of such a change.
It  has been brought to our notice that banks are not promoting opening of 'Small  Accounts' for greater financial inclusion. Banks are, therefore, advised to  open 'Small Accounts' for all persons who so desire. It is reiterated that all  limitations applicable to 'Small Accounts' should be strictly observed.
"Money  mules" can be used to launder the proceeds of fraud schemes (e.g.,  phishing and identity theft) by criminals who gain illegal access to deposit  accounts by recruiting third parties to act as "money mules." In some  cases these third parties may be innocent while in others they may be having  complicity with the criminals. In a  money mule transaction, an individual with a bank account is recruited to  receive cheque deposits or wire transfers and then transfer these funds to  accounts held on behalf of another person or to other individuals, minus a  certain commission payment. Money mules may be recruited by a variety of  methods, including spam e-mails, advertisements on genuine recruitment web  sites, social networking sites, instant messaging and advertisements in newspapers.  When caught, these money mules often have their bank accounts suspended,  causing inconvenience and potential financial loss, apart from facing likely  legal action for being part of a fraud. Many a time the address and contact  details of such mules are found to be fake or not up to date, making it  difficult for enforcement agencies to locate the account holder. The operations  of such mule accounts can be minimised if banks follow the guidelines contained  in the various circulars of the Reserve Bank on Know Your Customer (KYC) norms  / Anti-Money Laundering (AML) standards / Combating of Financing of Terrorism  (CFT) / Obligation of banks under PMLA, 2002.
With  a view to containing the risk of fraud involved in opening bank accounts of  salaried employees, banks need to rely on certification of identity as well as  address proof only from corporates and other entities of repute and should be  aware of the competent authority designated by the concerned employer to issue  such certificate / letter. Further, in addition to the certificate from  employer, banks should insist on at least one of the officially valid documents  as provided in the Prevention of Money Laundering Rules (viz. passport, driving  licence, PAN Card, Voter's Identity card etc.) or utility bills for KYC  purposes for opening bank account of salaried employees of corporates and other  entities
When the  bank has knowledge or reason to believe that the client account opened by a  professional intermediary is on behalf of a single client, that client must be  identified. Banks may hold 'pooled' accounts managed by professional  intermediaries on behalf of entities like mutual funds, pension funds or other  types of funds. Banks also maintain 'pooled' accounts managed by lawyers /  chartered accountants or stockbrokers for funds held 'on deposit' or 'in  escrow' for a range of clients. Where funds held by the intermediaries are not  co-mingled at the bank and there are 'sub-accounts', each of them attributable  to a beneficial owner, all the beneficial owners must be identified. Where such  funds are co-mingled at the bank, the bank should identify the beneficial  owners. Any professional intermediary, who is under any obligation that  inhibits bank's ability to know and verify the true identity of the client on  whose behalf the account is held or beneficial ownership of the account or  understand true nature and purpose of transaction/s, should not be allowed to  open an account on behalf of a client.
In  view of the risks involved in cash intensive businesses, accounts of bullion  dealers (including sub-dealers) & jewellers should also be categorised by  banks as 'high risk' requiring enhanced due diligence. The banks are also  required to subject  'high risk accounts' and the transactions to intensified monitoring. High risk associated with  such accounts should be taken into account by banks to identify suspicious  transactions for filing Suspicious Transaction Reports (STRs) to FIU-IND.
Banks are further advised that such  review of risk categorization of customers should be carried out at a  periodicity of not less than once in six months. Banks should also introduce a  system of periodical updation of customer identification data (including  photograph/s) after the account is opened. The periodicity of such updation should  be atleast every two year for high risk customers, atleast every eight years  for medium risk and at least every ten years for low risk categories. Positive  confirmation (obtaining KYC related updates through e-mail / letter /telephone,  etc.) will be required to be completed at least every two years for medium risk  and at least every three years for low risk categories.
Banks  are advised that KYC once done by one branch of the bank should be valid for  transfer of the account within the bank as long as full KYC procedure has been  done for the concerned account. The customer should be allowed to transfer his  account from one branch to another branch without restrictions. In order to  comply with KYC requirements of correct address of the person, fresh address  proof may be obtained from him /her upon such transfer by the transferee  branch. UCBs may transfer existing accounts at the transferor branch to the  transferee branch without insisting on fresh proof of address and on the basis  of a self-declaration from the account holder about his / her current address,  subject to submitting proof of address within a period of six months.
UCBs  may also accept rent agreement duly registered with State Government or similar  registration authority indicating the address of the customer, in addition to  other documents listed as proof of address in
Annex I
of our Master Circular on  KYC / AML / CFT dated July 1, 2014.
UCBs  are advised to initiate steps for allotting Unique Customer Identification Code  (UCIC) to all their customers while entering into any new relationships for  individual customers to begin with. Similarly, existing individual customer may  also be allotted UCIC. The UCIC will help UCBs to identify customers, track the  facilities availed, monitor financial transactions in a holistic manner and  enable UCBs to have a better approach to risk profiling of customers. It would  also smoothen banking operations for the customers.
KYC verification of all the members of Self Help  Group need not be done while opening the savings bank account of the SHG and  KYC verification of all the office bearers would suffice. As regards KYC  verification at the time of credit linking of SHGs, it is clarified that since  KYC would have already been verified while opening the savings bank account and  the account continues to be in operation and is to be used for credit linkage,  no separate KYC verification of the members or office bearers is necessary.
Annex  I
Master  Circular
Maintenance of Deposit Accounts
Joint  Accounts – ‘Either or Survivor’, ‘Latter or Survivor’
‘Former or Survivor’, etc.
--------------------------------------
{Ref. Paragraph 5.1.1}
LAC/19-96-29    28 August 1980
Chief  Executives of all member banks
Dear Sirs,
Joint  Accounts ‘Either or Survivor’,
‘Latter or Survivor’, ‘Former or Survivor’, etc.
In  the recent past, several letters have appeared in the press highlighting the  difficulties experienced by the joint holders of Savings Bank or Term Deposit  accounts, especially in regard to payment before maturity or in the settlement  of claims when one of the account holders dies. There appears to be some  confusion and misunderstanding about the procedure to be followed in respect of  such accounts and the legal implications of the expressions ‘Either or  Survivor’, ‘Latter of Survivor’, ‘Former or Survivor’ etc.
2.  Joint Accounts
In the case of joint accounts (Current, Savings or Deposits)  in the names of two or more persons, the terms relating to which do not provide  for payment of the amount due under the account to the Survivor(s) in the event  of death of one of them, for the banks to obtain a valid discharge payment  should be made jointly to Survivor(s) and the legal heirs of the deceased joint  account holder.  In such a case, in view of the difficulty in ascertaining  with certainty as to who the legal heirs of the deceased are, it is the  practice of the banks to insist on the production of legal representation (to  the estate of the deceased) before settling the claim. As obtaining a  grant of legal representation would entail delay and expenses, banks should  encourage the opening of joint accounts on terms such as, payable to (a) Either  or Survivor, (b) Former/Latter or Survivor, (c) Anyone or Survivors, or  Survivor, etc. This point has been emphasised in the Recommendation No. 6  of the Working Group on Customer Service in banks.
3. Benefits of Survivorship
If the benefit of survivorship is provided, the survivor can  give a valid discharge to the bank. Even though payment to the survivor  will confer a valid discharge to the bank, the survivor will, however, hold the  money only as trustee for the legal heirs (who may include the survivor as  well) unless he is the sole beneficial owner of the balance in the account or  the sole legal heir of the deceased. Thus, the survivor’s right unless he  is the sole owner of the balance in the account/sole legal heir of the  deceased, is only in the nature of a mere right to collect the money from the  bank.  If the legal heirs of the deceased lay a claim to the amount in the  bank, they should be advised that in terms of the contract applicable to the  account, the survivor is the person entitled to payment by the bank and that,  unless the bank is restrained by an order of a competent court, the bank would  be within its rights to make the payment to the survivors) named in the  account. The position, briefly, is that a payment to survivor can be made  if there are no orders from a competent court restraining the bank from making  such payments.
4. Joint Savings Bank  Account – Either or Survivor/Anyone or Survivors  or Survivor
As stated in paragraph 3 above, the survivor can give a  valid discharge to the bank. If the legal heirs claim the amount, the  bank can inform them that unless they obtain and have served on the bank an  order of competent court restraining the bank from effecting payment to the  survivor, the bank will be within its rights to do so.
5. Joint Term  Deposit Account – Premature/Payment or Loan on death of one of the account  holders
5.1 Account in the  style of ‘Either or Survivor or ‘Anyone or Survivors or Survivor’
In a joint term deposit account which has been opened in the  style of either or survivor/any one or survivors or survivor, the bank often  receives a request, on the death of one of the joint account holders, from the  surviving depositors) to allow premature encashment or the grant of a loan  against the term deposit receipt. It would be in order to accede to the request  of the surviving depositors) for premature payment if (i) there is an option  included in the contract of deposit to repay before maturity and (ii)  “either/any one or survivorship” mandate has been obtained from original  depositors. Requests for loans from surviving depositor(s) could also be  considered in special cases, though in the case of such loans, the bank may  face a possible risk if the legal representatives of the deceased depositor lay  an effective claim to the deposit before it is paid on maturity. In such an  event, the bank will have to look to the borrower(s) for repayment. This  position for premature payment or grant of loan is applicable also in respect  of a joint account (in the style of either or survivor/any one or survivors or  survivor), where all the account holders are alive.
As a measure of operational prudence, a clause to the effect  that loan/premature payment can be permitted to either/any one of the  depositors any time during the deposit period can, however, be included in the  term deposit contract, i.e. the account opening or application form itself, in  the manner indicated in paragraph 6 below.
5.2 Joint Term Deposit - Former or  Survivor/Latter or Survivor etc.
In the case of these term deposits, the intention of the  owner depositor (former/latter) is to facilitate repayment of the term deposit  to the survivor only in the event of his death. He (the owner depositor) is in a  position to retain with him at all times, the right to dispose of the monies  until his death or maturity of the deposit receipt, whichever is earlier. There  should, therefore, be no objection to the bank permitting premature payment of  such deposits or granting advances against them at the request of the  former/latter without insisting on the production of a consent letter from the  other party/parties to the term deposit receipt.  Here also it is  preferable to make this position explicit to the joint depositors, by  incorporating suitable clause in the term deposit account opening or  application form.
6. Special clause  in the application/account opening form for Term Deposit Receipt
Banks may consider incorporating a clause to the  following effect in the account opening form/application form establishing the  contract of term deposit:
‘The Bank may, on receipt of written application from Shri --------------------  the former/the latter/
the first
name the second name etc. of us or
Either  or Survivor of us
, in its Any one or Survivors of Survivor of us,  absolute discretion and subject to such terms and conditions as the Bank may  stipulate, (a) grant a loan/advance against the security of the term deposit  receipt to be issued in our joint names or (b) make premature payment of the  proceeds of the deposit to the former/the latter/
the first named of us
/either  the second or survivor of us etc. named of us/any one of us or survivors or  survivor of us”.
Annex  II
Master  Circular
Maintenance of Deposit Accounts
The Depositor Education and Awareness Fund  Scheme, 2014
The  Reserve Bank of India,  in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-sections (1) and (5) of Section 26A  of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949) and of all the powers enabling  it in this behalf, hereby makes the following Scheme:-
Chapter  I
1.  Short Title and Commencement:
(i)  This Scheme may be called The Depositor Education and Awareness Fund Scheme,  2014.
(ii)  This Scheme shall come into force with effect from the date on which it is  notified in the Official Gazette.
Chapter  II
2.  Definitions:
In  this Scheme, unless the context otherwise requires:-
(i)  (a) ‘Act’ means the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949);
(b)  ‘bank’ means a banking company, a co-operative bank, multi-state co-operative  bank, State Bank of India, a subsidiary bank, a corresponding new bank and a  regional rural bank;
(c)  ‘Fund’ means the Depositor Education and Awareness Fund established under  paragraph 3;
(d)  ‘Committee’ means the Committee constituted under paragraph 8 to administer the  Fund;
(e)  ‘Effective date’ means the date on which the Scheme is notified in the Official  Gazette;
(f)  ‘DICGC’ means the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation  established under Section 3 of the Deposit Insurance Corporation Act, 1961;
(g)  ‘Liquidator’ means liquidator of a bank appointed under any law for the time  being in force;
(h)  ‘Principal amount’ means the amount, including interest, transferred by a bank  to the Fund in terms of Section 26A of the Act;
(i)  ‘Amount due’ means any credit balances in any account or any deposit in a bank  remaining unclaimed or inoperative for ten years or more;
(ii)  Words and expressions used in this Scheme and not defined herein, but defined  in the Act, shall have the meaning respectively assigned to them in the Act.
3.  Establishment of the Fund and Credits therein:
(i)  Reserve Bank hereby establishes a Fund to be called the Depositor Education and  Awareness Fund referred to in Section 26A of the Act.
(ii)  The amounts to be credited to the Fund by banks shall be deposited in the  specified account maintained with the Reserve Bank.
(iii)  For the purpose of this paragraph, the amounts to be credited to the Fund shall  be the credit balance in any deposit account maintained with banks which have  not been operated upon for ten years or more, or any amount remaining unclaimed  for ten years or more, which include:-
(a)  savings bank deposit accounts;
(b)  fixed or term deposit accounts;
(c)  cumulative/recurring deposit accounts;
(d)  current deposit accounts;
(e)  other deposit accounts in any form or with any name;
(f)  cash credit accounts;
(g)  loan accounts after due appropriation by the banks;
(h)  margin money against issue of Letter of Credit/Guarantee etc., or any security  deposit;
(i)  outstanding telegraphic transfers, mail transfers, demand drafts, pay orders,  bankers cheques, sundry deposit accounts, vostro accounts, inter-bank clearing  adjustments, unadjusted National Electronic Funds Transfer (NEFT) credit  balances and other such transitory accounts, unreconciled credit balances on  account of Automated Teller Machine (ATM) transactions, etc.;
(j)  undrawn balance amounts remaining in any prepaid card issued by banks but not  amounts outstanding against travellers cheques or other similar instruments,  which have no maturity period;
(k)  rupee proceeds of foreign currency deposits held by banks after conversion of  foreign currency to rupees in accordance with extant foreign exchange  regulations; and
(l)  such other amounts as may be specified by the Reserve Bank from time to time.
(iv)  Any amount payable in foreign currency under an instrument or a transaction,  that has remained unclaimed for ten years or more, shall at the time of  transfer to the Fund be converted into Indian Rupees at the exchange rate  prevailing on that date and in the event of a claim, the Fund shall be liable  to refund only the Indian Rupees received by the Fund with respect to such  instrument or transaction.
(v)  A bank shall transfer to the Fund the entire amount as specified in  sub-paragraph (iii), including the accrued interest that the bank would have  been required to pay to the customer/ depositor as on the date of transfer to  the Fund.
(vi)  A bank shall calculate the cumulative balances in all such accounts as specified  in sub-paragraphs (iii) and (iv), as on the day prior to the effective date and  transfer the amount to the Fund on the last working day of subsequent month  along with the interest accrued as specified in sub-paragraph (v).
(vii)  From the effective date, banks are required to transfer to the Fund the amounts  becoming due in each calendar month (i.e. balances remaining unclaimed for ten  years or more) as specified in sub-paragraphs (iii) and (iv) and the interest  accrued thereon as specified in sub-paragraph (v), on the last working day of  the subsequent month.
(viii)  Notwithstanding anything contained in the Banking Companies (Period of  Preservation of Records) Rules, 1985, or Co-operative Banks (Period of  Preservation of Records) Rules, 1985, banks shall preserve records/documents  containing details of all accounts and transactions, including deposit accounts  in respect of which amounts are required to be credited to the Fund  permanently; and where refund has been claimed from the Fund, banks shall preserve  records/documents in respect of such accounts and transactions, for a period of  at least five years from the date of refund from the Fund.
(ix)  Reserve Bank may call for all relevant information in respect of an account or  deposit or transaction for which a claim for refund has been submitted by a  bank.
4.  Refunds and Interest:
(i)  In case of demand from a customer/ depositor whose unclaimed amount/deposit had  been transferred to Fund, banks shall repay the customer/depositor, along with  interest if applicable, and lodge a claim for refund from the Fund for an  equivalent amount paid to the customer/depositor.
(ii)  The interest payable, if any, from the Fund on a claim shall accrue only from  the date on which the balance in an account was transferred to the Fund to the  date of payment to the customer/depositor. No interest shall be payable in  respect of amounts refunded from the Fund, in respect of which no interest was  payable by the bank to its customer/depositor.
(iii)  Rate of interest, if any, payable on the principal amount transferred to the  Fund shall be specified by Reserve Bank from time to time.
(iv)  In the case of a claim for refund of foreign currency denominated deposit  accounts, instruments or transactions specified in paragraphs 3 (iii) (k) and 3  (iv), irrespective of whether the banks have paid the depositor/customer in  Indian rupees or foreign currency, the banks shall be entitled to claim refund  of the eligible amount from the Fund, in Indian rupees only.
(v)  In case of any claim for refund of part amount by the depositor whose unclaimed  amount/inoperative deposit had been transferred to the Fund, the account will  be revived and will become operative. The bank shall claim the entire amount  transferred to the Fund in respect of such depositor along with interest  payable, if any, from the Fund.
(vi)  Refunds made by a bank in each calendar month should be claimed for  reimbursement from the Fund on the last working day of the subsequent month.
(vii)  In the case of a bank under liquidation, during the pendency of the liquidation  proceedings, if any claim is received from depositors whose deposits were  covered by DICGC insurance at the time of transfer to the Fund, the Fund shall  pay to the liquidator, an amount equal to the amount that could have been  claimed from DICGC with respect to such deposits, and with respect to all other  amounts paid by the liquidator towards the amounts transferred to the Fund,  whether insured by DICGC or not, the Fund shall reimburse the liquidator.
5.  Banks to submit Returns:
Banks  shall furnish returns to Reserve Bank in the form and manner as prescribed by  Reserve Bank from time to time.
6.  Accounts:
(i)  The Fund shall maintain its accounts including Income and Expenditure Statement  in the form and manner as prescribed by the Committee.
(ii)  The amounts credited to the account of the Fund, maintained with Reserve Bank  shall form part of Reserve Bank Balance Sheet.
(iii)  The amounts credited to the account of the Fund may be invested by Reserve Bank  in such manner as prescribed by the Committee.
(iv)  All income of the Fund shall be credited to the Fund.
(v)  All expenditure incurred for the promotion of depositors’ education, awareness,  interests and other purposes that may be specified by Reserve Bank under  Section 26A (4) of the Act, shall be charged to the Fund.
7.  Audit of Accounts:
(i)  The accounting year for the Fund shall be from April 1 to March 31 of the  subsequent year.
(ii)  The accounts of the Fund shall be audited by the statutory auditor of the  Reserve Bank or any other auditors as directed by the Reserve Bank.
(iii)  The Annual Accounts of the Fund, at the end of each accounting year, shall be  placed before the Central Board of the Reserve Bank, along with the report of  auditors and the activity report of the Fund.
Chapter  III
Constitution, Management and Functions of the Committee
8.  Constitution of the Committee:
(i)  There shall be a Committee to administer and manage the Fund in accordance with  the Scheme.
(ii)  The Committee shall consist of an ex-officio Chairperson and not more than six  members as decided by the Reserve Bank. The detail of the composition of the  Committee is as follows:
(a)  a Deputy Governor of Reserve Bank, nominated by Governor, shall be the  ex-officio Chairperson of the Committee;
(b)  not more than two officers of Reserve Bank, not below the rank of Chief General  Manager, nominated by it in this behalf;
(c)  Chairman and Managing Director or Chief Executive Officer of a bank by  rotation, as nominated by the Reserve Bank;
(d)  one person nominated by Reserve Bank, who is considered as expert in the field  of banking or accounting or any other field, which the Reserve Bank considers  appropriate;
(e)  one person nominated by Reserve Bank, representing the interests of customers  and depositors of banks, drawn from amongst organisations or associations  formed by such customers or depositors and
(f)  an officer, not below the rank of Chief General Manager, nominated by Reserve  Bank to act as Member Secretary to the Committee.
(iii)  The members, except the ex-officio Chairperson of the Committee, shall hold  office for a period of two years and thereafter until their successors shall  have been nominated.
(iv)  A retiring member shall be eligible for re-nomination.
(v)  Reserve Bank shall provide Secretariat for the Committee and necessary  infrastructure and manpower to assist the Committee in the administration of  the Fund.
(vi)  The Committee may constitute one or more Sub-Committees, from amongst its  members, whenever it deems necessary to do so, to facilitate efficient and  speedy discharge of its functions.
(vii)  Any defect in the constitution or any vacancy in the Committee would not  invalidate any proceedings of the Committee or the decisions taken by the  Committee.
(viii)  The members mentioned at sub-paragraphs (ii)(d) and (ii)(e) shall be entitled  to remuneration, as determined by Reserve Bank, from time to time for the  meetings attended by them.
9.  Functions and Objectives of the Committee:
(i)  The Committee shall meet as and when necessary, but at least once in a quarter.  The quorum for each meeting shall be at least the Chairman and one-third of its  total members.
(ii)  The Committee shall frame its own rules of business.
(iii)  The Fund shall be utilised for promotion of depositors’ interests and for such  other purposes which may be necessary for promotion of depositors’ interest as  may be specified by the Reserve Bank. The Committee shall function keeping in  view the purposes contemplated in Section 26A(4) of the Act and in accordance  with the purposes that may be specified by Reserve Bank in this regard from  time to time.
(iv)  The Committee may from time to time lay down a list of activities, the criteria  and procedure, etc. for incurring expenditure and achieving the objectives of  the Fund.
(v)  The Committee shall administer the Fund and shall exercise all powers on behalf  of the Fund, including incurring of all expenditure that may be charged to the  Fund, and keeping the corpus of the Fund invested.
(vi)  The expenses of the Committee and other expenses for administration of the Fund  shall be charged to the Fund as decided by the Committee.
(vii)  For facilitating the Reserve Bank for determination of the rate of interest  payable by the Fund to the depositors, the Committee shall provide to the Reserve  Bank such information on the income and expenditure of the Fund as may be  required.
10.  Power to call upon the banks:
(i)  The Committee may call upon any bank to pay the amount due to the Fund.
(ii)  The Committee may call for any information from banks relating to unclaimed  amounts and the inoperative accounts, in general or a bank in particular, from  time to time, and it shall be the duty of such banks/bank to furnish the  information sought by the Committee.
11.  Promotion of Depositors’ Interests and recognition of entities:
(i)  For the promotion of depositors’ interests, the Committee may  register/recognise from time to time various institutions, organizations or  associations, engaged in activities relating to depositor awareness and  education, including those proposing to conduct programmes for depositors of  banks, organizing seminars and symposia for depositors and undertaking projects  and research activities relating to these areas.
(ii)  Institutions, organizations or associations registered/recognized by the  Committee may be considered for grant of funds as a grant-in-aid either as one  time measure or in stages or by way of reimbursement, depending upon the nature  of the activity proposed.
(iii)  The Committee shall determine and lay down the criteria for grant of financial  assistance to institutions, organizations and associations, as stated in sub-  paragraph (i).
(iv)  The Committee may examine the proposals and the proposed end use of grants and  assistance before authorising release of funds.
(v)  The Committee may call for information in respect of or verify in any manner,  the end use of funds granted to such institutions, organizations or  associations.
(vi)  The Committee may take such action as it deems fit in the interests of the  Fund, including legal action, as and when considered necessary.
12.  Interpretation of the provisions of the Scheme:
If  any issue arises in the interpretation of the provisions of the Scheme, the  matter shall be referred to the Reserve Bank, and the decision of the Reserve  Bank thereon shall be final.
13.  Amendment of the Scheme:
The  Reserve Bank may amend any or all the provisions of the Scheme anytime, if  deemed necessary by giving a Gazette Notification.
14.  Power to remove difficulties:
If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the  provisions of this Scheme, the Reserve Bank may take such actions or pass such  orders, as may appear necessary for the purpose of removing such difficulty.
Appendix
Master  Circular
Maintenance of Deposit Accounts
List of Circulars consolidated in the Master  Circular
Sr.    No.
Circular No.
Date
Subject
1
UBD.BPD    (PCB) Cir.No.69/14.01.062/2013-14
10.6.2014
Know Your Customer (KYC) Norms / Anti-Money    Laundering (AML) Measures/Combating of Financing of Terrorism (CFT) /Obligations    of Banks under Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002 - Primary    (Urban) Co-operative Banks – Clarification on Proof of address
2
DBOD    No.DEAF Cell.BC.114/30.01.002/2013-14
27.05.2014
The Depositor Education and Awareness Fund Scheme,    2014 – Section 26A of Banking Regulation Act, 1949 – Operational Guidelines
3
UBD.BPD.CIR.No.62/13.03.000/2013-14
15.05.2014
Levy of penal charges on Non-Maintenance of    Minimum balances in inoperative accounts
4
UBD.BPD.(PCB).CIR.No.61/13.01.000/2013-14
12.05.2014
Opening of Bank Accounts in the Names of Minor
5
DBOD    No.DEAF Cell.BC.101/30.01.002/2013-14
21.03.2014
The Depositor Education and Awareness Fund Scheme,    2014 – Section 26A of Banking Regulation Act, 1949
6
UBD.BPD.(PCB).CIR.No.44/13.01.000/2013-14
21.1.2014
Legal Guardianship Certificates issued under the    Mental Health Act, 1987 and National Trust for the Welfare of Persons with    Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities act,    1999
7
UBD.BPD.(PCB).CIR.No.35/13.01.000/2013-14
31.10.2013
Financial Inclusion – Access to Banking Services –    Basic Savings Bank deposit Account (BSBDA) -FAQs
8
UBD.BPD.(PCB).CIR.No.34/13.01.000/2013-14
30.10.2013
Settlement of claims in respect of    Missing Persons in Uttarakhand Disaster
9
UBD.BPD.(PCB).CIR.No.23/13.01.000/2013-14
30.9.2013
Unclaimed Deposits /Inoperative Accounts in UCBs –    Treatment of Certain Savings Bank accounts opened for Credit of Scholarship    Amounts and Credit of Direct Benefit Transfer under Government Schemes
10
UBD.BPD.(PCB).CIR.No.21/14.01.062/2013-14
27.9.2013
Foreign contribution (Regulation) Rule, 2011 –    Online Reporting of Receipt of Foreign contribution by banks – Primary    (Urban) Co-operative Banks
11
UBD.BPD(AD)Cir.No.4/14.01.062/2013-14
10.9.2013
Foreign Students studying in India –KYC    Procedure for Opening of Bank Accounts
12
UBD.BPD.(PCB).CIR.No.10/13.01.000/2013-14
5.9.2013
Settlement of Claims of Deceased Depositors -    Simplification of Procedure – Placing of Claim Forms on Bank’s website
13
UBD.BPD(PCB)Cir.No.11/14.01.062/2013-14
5.9.2013
Know Your Customer (KYC) Norms / Anti-Money    Laundering (AML) Measures/Combating of Financing of Terrorism (CFT) /Obligations    of Banks under Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002 - Primary    (Urban) Co-operative Banks – Simplifying Norms for Self Help Groups – Primary    UCBs
14
UBD.BPD(PCB)Cir.No.2/14.01.062/2013-14
31.7.2013
Know Your Customer (KYC) Norms / Anti-Money    Laundering (AML) Measures/Combating of Financing of Terrorism (CFT) /Obligations    of Banks under Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002 - Primary    (Urban) Co-operative Banks – Simplifying Norms for Self Help Groups – Primary    UCBs
15
UBD.BPD(PCB)Cir.No.46/14.01.062/2012-13
3.4.2013
Know Your Customer (KYC) Norms / Anti-Money    Laundering (AML) Measures/Combating of Financing of Terrorism (CFT) /Obligations    of Banks under Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002 - Primary    (Urban) Co-operative Banks – Simplifying Norms for Self Help Groups – Primary    UCBs
16
UBD.BPD(PCB)Cir.No.39/14.01.062/2012-13
7.3.2013
Know Your Customer (KYC) Norms / Anti-Money    Laundering (AML) Measures/Combating of Financing of Terrorism (CFT) /Obligations    of Banks under Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002 - Primary    (Urban) Co-operative Banks
17
UBD.CO.PCB.Cir.No.37/14.01.062/2012-13
25.2.2013
Know Your Customer (KYC)    Norms / Anti-Money Laundering (AML)
Measures - Combating of Financing of Terrorism (CFT) / Obligations of
Banks under Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002
18
UBD.BPD.(PCB).CIR.No.32/13.01.000/2012-13
21.1.2013
Settlement of Claims in Respect of Deceased Depositors    - Simplification of Procedure - UCBs
19
UBD.BPD(PCB)Cir.No.28/14.01.062/2012-13
19.12.2012
Know Your Customer (KYC) norms / Anti-Money    Laundering (AML) Standards/ Combating of Financing of Terrorism (CFT) /    Obligation of banks under Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002
20
UBD.BPD    (PCB) Cir.No.25/13.01.000/2012-13
3.12.2012
The Co-operative Banks (Nomination) Rules, 1985 -    Clarifications
21
UBD.BPD.(PCB).Cir.No.14/14.01.062/2012-13
9.10.2012
Know Your Customer (KYC) / Anti-Money Laundering    (AML) / Combating of Financing of Terrorism (CFT) Guidelines - Unique    Customer Identification Code (UCIC) for banks' customers in India -    Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks
22
UBD.BPD.(PCB).Cir.No.8/14.01.062/2012-13
13.9.2012
Know Your Customer (KYC) / Anti-Money Laundering    (AML)/Combating  of Financing of    Terrorism (CFT) - Risk Categorization and Updation of Customer Profiles -    Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks
23
UBD.BPD.(PCB)    Cir No.6/13.01.000/2012-13
30.8.2012
Premature Repayment of Term /Fixed Deposits in    banks with “Either or Survivor” or “Former or Survivor” mandate -    Clarification
24
UBD.BPD.(PCB)    Cir No.5/13.01.000/2012-13
17.8.2012
Financial Inclusion – Access to Banking Services –    Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account
25
UBD.BPD.(PCB)    Cir No.3/14.01.062/2012-13
10.7.2012
Intra-bank Deposit Accounts Portability
26
UBD.BPD.(PCB)No.34/12.05.001/2011-12
11.5.2012
Know Your Customer Norms –  Accounts of Proprietary  concern
27
UBD.BPD.(PCB)CIR.No.11/13.01.000/2011-12
17.11.2011
Repayment of Term /Fixed Deposits in Bank
28
UBD.BPD.(PCB)No.8/12.05.001/2011-12
09.11.2011
Know Your Customer Norms –  Letter issued by Unique Identification    Authority of India (UIDAI) containing details of Name, Address and Aadhaar    Number
29
UBD.BPD.(PCB)No.37/12.05.001/2010-11
18.02.2011
Know Your Customer Norms –  Anti-Money Laundering (AML) Standards /    Combatting of financing Terrorism (CFT) / Obligation of Banks under PMLA,    2002
30
UBD.CO.BPD.No.35/12.05.001/2010-11
10.01.2011
Opening of Bank Accounts - Salaried Employees
31
UBD.BPD.No.33/12.05.001/2010-11
31.12.2010
Operation of Bank Accounts and Money Mules
32
UBD.BPD.(PCB).No.10/12.05.001/2010-11
23.8.2010
Know your Customer Norms / Anti    Money Laundering Standards / Combating of financing of Terrorism (CFT) /    Obligation of Banks under Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002
33
UBD.BPD.CO.NSB1/38/12.03.000/2009-10
23.12.2009
Know your Customer guidelines –    Accounts of Proprietary Concern
34
UBD.CO.BPD.(PCB).Cir.No.22/12.05.001/2009-10
16.11.2009
Extension of Safe Deposit    Locker/Safe Custody Article Facility and Access to Safe Deposit Lockers    /Return of Safe Custody Articles by banks - UCBs
35
UBD.BPD.(PCB).Cir.No.19/13.01.000/2009-10
09.11.2009
Unclaimed Deposits and    Inoperative/Dormant Accounts in UCBs
36
UBD.BPD.CO.NSB1/11/12.03.000/2009-10
29.09.2009
Know Your Customer Guidelines –    Accounts of Proprietary Concern
37
UBD.CO.BPD.PCB.Cir.No.9/12.05.001/2009-10
16.09.2009
Adherence to KYC/AML guidelines    while opening and conduct of the accounts of Multi Level Marketing Firms
38
UBD    CO BPD Cir No:56 09.39.000/2008-09
12.03.2009
Acknowledgement of Nomination and    indicating the Name of the Nominee in Pass Books / Fixed Deposit Receipts
39
UBD    CO BPD Cir No:9/13.01.000/2008-09
01.09.2008
Unclaimed Deposits and    Inoperative/ Dormant Accounts in UCBs
40
DPSS    No 2096/04.04.007/07-08
20.06.2008
Use of electronic mode of payment    for large value transactions
41
45/13.01.000/2007-08
12.05.2008
Settlement of claims in respect of    missing person
42
DPSS.No1407/02.10.02/2007-08
10.03.2008
Use of electronic mode of payment    for large value transactions
43
UBD.CO.BPD.(PCB).No.32/09.39.000/2007-08
25.02.2008
Know Your Customer (KYC) Norms /    Anti-Money Laundering (AML) Standards  /Combating of Financing Terrorism
44
UBD.CO.BPD.No.27/12.05.001/2007-08
4.12.2007
Guardians appointed by Dist.    Courts
45
UBD    (PCB) BPD Cir No: 21/13.01.000/2007-08
15.11.2007
Deposit schemes with lock-in    period
46
UBD.CO.BPD.(PCB).No.2/09.18.300/2007-08
4.7.    2007
IT-enabled Financial inclusion
47
UBD    CO BPD Cir No: 36/13.01.000/2006-07
19.04.2007
Nomination Facility in Single    Deposit Accounts – UCBs
48
UBD CO BPD Cir No: 46/16.12..000/2006-07
19.04.2007
Norms for maintaining NRE/NRO    accounts- UCBs
49
UBD    PCB Cir No.19/13.01.000//2005-06
24.11.2005
Financial inclusion – UCBs
50
UBD    PCB Cir No.4/13.01.000/2005-06
14.07.2005
Settlement of claims in respect of    deceased depositors – simplified procedure- UCBs
51
UBD    PCB Cir No.7/09.11.01/2004-05
29.07.2004
Opening of current account by    banks- need for discipline
52
UBD    PCB Cir No.14/09.11.01/2004-05
24.08.2004
Opening of current account by    banks- need for discipline
53
UBD.CO.BR.29/16.48.00/2000-01
29.01.2001
Payment of balances in accounts of    the deceased customers to legal survivors/claimants
54
UBD.BR.15/16.48.00/2000-2001
21.11.2000
Payment of balances in accounts of    the Deceased Customers to survivors/claimants
55
UBD.CO.BSD.I/11/12.05.00/2000-2001
15.11.2000
Opening of deposit accounts -    Completion of formalities
56
UBD.BR.Cir.3/16.48.00/2000-2001
25.08.2000
Payment of balance in accounts of    the Deceased customers to survivors/claimants
57
UBD No BSD.I/ 12/12.05.00/99-2000
28.10.1999
Receipt of foreign contributions    by various Associations/Organisations in India under Foreign Contribution    (Regulation) Act, 1976
58
.UBD.No.BR.32/16.04.00/98-99
28.06.1999
Nomination Facility in Deposit    Accounts
59
UBD No.BSD.I/PCBs.18/12.05.01/98-99
30.01.1999
Recent of Foreign Contributions by    various Associations /Organisations in India under Foreign Contribution    (Regulation ) Act, 1976
60
UBD.No.DS.PCB.Cir.12/13.01.00/98-99
21.12.1998
Operation of Banks Accounts by    Old/Sick/Incapacitated Customers
61
UBD.No.Plan.PCB.Cir.23/09.50.00/97-98
28.11.1997
Issue of cheque books
62
UBD.No.BSD.I/PCB/09/12.05.00/97-98
18.09.1997
Opening of fictitious/benami deposit    accounts and collection of stolen/forged instruments etc.
63
UBD.No.I&L.49/12.05.00/95-96
14.03.1996
Frauds in banks - -Extension    Counters
64
UBD.No.I&L.51/12.05.00/95-96
14.03.1996
Frauds in banks through fictitious    accounts
65
UBD.No.I&L.PCB.44/12.05.00/95-96
22.02.1996
Monitoring of deposit accounts
66
UBD.No.I&L.PCB.36/12.05.00/95-96
05.01.1996
Committee to enquire into various    aspects relating to frauds and malpractices in banks
67
UBD.No.I&L.PCB.28/12.05.00/95-96
10.11.1995
Monitoring of deposit accounts
68
UBD.No.I&L/PCB/65/12.05.00/94-95
28.06.1995
Frauds in banks - Monitoring of    deposit accounts
69
UBD.No.I&L(PCB)38/12.15.00/94-95
10.01.1995
34th Report of the Estimates    Committee on the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) -    Prevention of frauds
70
UBDNo.I&L27/12.05.00/94-95
31.10.1994
Committee to enquire into various    aspects relating to frauds and malpractices in banks obtaining photographs of    depositors
71
UBD.No.I&L/PCB24/12.05.00/94-95
19.10.1994
Fraudulent encashment of payment    instruments
72
UBD.No.I&L74/12.05.00/93/94
27.05.1994
Committee to enquire into various    aspects relating to frauds and malpractices in banks
73
UBDNo.36/12.05.00/93-94
08.12.1993
Committee to enquire into various    aspects relating to frauds and malpractices in banks Primary Co-operative    Banks
74
UBD.DC.1/V.1-89/90
02.01.1990
Opening of Bank Accounts in the    Names of Minors with Mothers as Guardians
75
UBD.No.BR.695/B.1-88/89
19.12.1988
Payment of Balance in Accounts of    the Deceased Customers to Survivors/Claimants - Non-insistence on Production    of Succession Certificate - Extension to Other Assets
76
Ref.UBD.No.DC.18/V.1-88/89
10.08.1988
Deposit Collection Schemes floated    by Private Organisations - Sale of Lottery Tickets by Banks
77
UBD.No.BR.483/B1-87/88
21.10.1987
Payment of Balance in Accounts of    the Deceased Customers to Survivors/Claimants
78
UBD.No.I&L.88/J.1-87/88
08.06.1987
Matters relating to Greater    Co-ordination between Banking System and Income-tax Authorities
79
UBD.DC.19/V.1.86/87
03.09.1986
Acceptance of Deposits by    Unincorporated Bodies/ Private Ltd. Companies with "Bank Guarantee"
80
UBD.BR.13/A6-86/87
11.08.1986
Banking Laws (Amendment) Act, 1983    - Sections 45ZA to 45ZF read with Section 56 of the Banking Regulation Act,    1949 - Co-operative Banks Nomination Rules, 1985 - Nomination Facilities
81
UBD.No.I&L.110/J.I-85/86
02.06.1986
Deposit Accounts – Opening of
82
UBD.BR.764A/A-6-84/85
29.03.1985
Banking Laws (Amendments) Act,    1983-84 -Bringing into force of remaining provisions
83
UBD.(DC)1148/V.1-84/85
22.02.1985
Opening of a bank account in the    name of minor with mother as guardian
84
UBD.BR.16/A.6-84/85
09.07.1984
Banking Laws (Amendment) Act, 1983
85
DBOD.UBD.(I & L) No.2584/J1-82/83
22.03.1983
Opening of various deposit    accounts in primary co-operative banks-introduction
86
ACD.ID(P)6428/J.1/80-81
17.02.1981
Joint accounts 'either or    survivor', latter or survivor, 'former or survivor' etc.
87
ACD: ID: 4998-J: 17-76-7
09.12.1976
Deposit Accounts: Introduction
88
ACD:INSP: 5173/F:15/70-71
17.06.1971
Register for Unclaimed Deposits
89
ACD.BR.1454/A.1/67-8
08.04.1968
Position of term deposits accepted    prior to the commencement of the banking laws (application to co-operative    societies) act 1965 by a co-operative society other than a primary credit    society or a co-operative bank
List of other Circulars from which instructions  relating to maintenance of Deposit accounts have also been consolidated in the  Master Circular
Sr. No.
Circular No.
Date
Subject
1.
UBD.BSD-1/8/12.05.00/2000-01
09-11-2000
Frauds – Preventive    Measures
2.
UBD.21/12.15.00/93-94
21-09-1993
Committee to    enquire into various aspects relating to frauds and malpractices in primary    (urban) co-operative banks.