(125 kb)
Master Circular on Remittance Facilities for Non-Resident Indians / Persons of Indian Origin / Foreign Nationals
RBI/2014-2015/8
Master Circular No.8/2014-15
July  01, 2014
(Amended up to January  22, 2015)
To
All  Authorised Dealer Category – I banks and Authorised banks
Madam / Sir
Master  Circular on Remittance Facilities for Non-Resident Indians / Persons of Indian  Origin / Foreign Nationals
Remittance facilities  for Non-Residents /Persons of Indian Origin /Foreign Nationals are being  governed by sub-section (1) and (2) of section 6 of the Foreign Exchange  Management Act, 1999 read with
FEMA  Notification No.13/2000-RB
and
FEMA  Notification No. 21/2000-RB  dated May 3, 2000
, as amended  from time to time.
2. This
Master Circular
consolidates the  existing instructions on the subject of
“Remittance facilities for  Non-Resident Indians / Persons of Indian Origin / Foreign Nationals”
at one  place. The list of underlying circulars/ notifications consolidated in this  Master Circular is furnished in the Appendix.
3. This Master Circular is  being updated from time to time as and when the fresh instructions are issued.  The date up to which the Master Circular has been updated is suitably  indicated.
4. This Master Circular may be referred to for general guidance. The  Authorised Persons and the Authorised Dealer Category – I banks may refer to  respective circulars/ notifications for detailed information, if so needed.
Yours  faithfully
(C D Srinivasan)
Chief General Manager
INDEX
1. Remittance  facilities for Non Resident Indians (NRIs) / Persons of Indian Origin (PIO) and Foreign  Nationals
2. Definition  of NRI/PIO
3. Remittance  of current income
4. Remittance  of assets by a foreign national of non-Indian origin
5. Remittance  of assets by NRI/PIO
6. Remittance  of Salary
7. Repatriation of sale  proceeds of residential property purchased by NRIs / PIO out of foreign exchange
8. Facilities  for students
9. Income-tax  clearance
10. International  Credit Cards
Annex-1
Statement  / returns to be submitted to the Reserve Bank
APPENDIX
List of  notifications/circulars  which have been  consolidated in this  Master Circular
1. Remittance facilities for Non  Resident Indians (NRIs) / Persons of Indian Origin (PIO) and Foreign Nationals
The Regulations for transfer of assets  outside India by a person, whether resident in India or not, are given in the  Notification No. FEMA 13/2000-RB dated May 3, 2000, as amended from time to  time. Accordingly, remittance of funds from the sale of capital assets in India  held by a person, whether resident in or outside India, requires approval of  the Reserve Bank except to the extent provided in FEMA or Rules or Regulations  made there under.
2.  Definition of NRI/PIO
NRI for this purpose is defined as a person  resident outside India who is citizen of India. In terms of Regulation 2 of  FEMA Notification No.13 dated May 3, 2000, Non-Resident Indian (NRI) means a  person resident outside India who is a citizen of India. Person of Indian  Origin (PIO) means a citizen of any country other than Bangladesh or Pakistan  who had (a) at any time held Indian passport or (b) he or either of his parents  or any of his grandparents was a citizen of India by virtue of the Constitution  of India or the Citizenship Act, 1955 or (c) the person is a spouse of an  Indian citizen or a person referred to in (a) or (b).
3.  Remittance of current income
3.1 Remittance  outside India of current income like rent, dividend, pension, interest, etc. in  India of the account holder is a permissible debit to the NRO account.  Authorised Dealer banks may also allow repatriation of current income like  rent, dividend, pension, interest, etc. of NRIs who do not maintain an NRO  account in India, subject to payment of applicable taxes as prescribed by  Central Board of Direct Taxes.
3.2 NRIs/  PIO have the option to credit the current income to their Non Resident  (External) Rupee account, provided the Authorized Dealer bank is satisfied that  the credit represents current income of the non-resident account holder and  income tax thereon has been deducted / provided for.
3.3 Foreign  nationals who come to India on employment and become residents in terms of  section 2 (v) of FEMA, 1999, and are eligible to open/ hold a resident savings  bank account, are permitted to re-designate their resident account maintained  in India as NRO account on leaving the country after their employment to enable  them to receive their legitimate dues subject to certain conditions.
4.  Remittance of assets by a foreign national of non-Indian origin
4.1 
          A  foreign national of non-Indian origin who has retired from an employment in  India or who has inherited assets from a person resident in India or who is a  widow of an Indian citizen who was resident in India, may remit an amount not  exceeding USD one million, per financial year (April-March), subject to the  satisfaction of the Authorised Dealer bank, on production of documentary  evidence in support of acquisition/ inheritance of assets and payment of  applicable taxes in India, if any.
4.2 These remittance facilities are not available  to citizens of Nepal and Bhutan.
4.3 When a person resident in India leaves India  for a country (other than Nepal or Bhutan) for employment/business/vocation  outside India or with an intention to stay outside India, his/her existing  account is re-designated as NRO account. In order to facilitate foreign  nationals to collect their pending dues in India, AD Category-I banks may  permit such foreign nationals to re-designate their resident account maintained  in India as NRO account on leaving the country after their employment to enable  them to receive their pending bona fide dues, subject to the following  conditions:
AD  Category-I bank should obtain the full details from the account holder about  his legitimate dues expected to be received into his account.
AD Category-I   bank  has  to   satisfy  itself  as   regards  the  credit   of  amounts  which have to be bona fide dues of the account  holder when she/ he was a resident in India.
The  funds credited to the NRO account should be repatriated abroad immediately,  subject to the AD Category-I bank satisfying itself regarding the payment of  the applicable Income tax and other taxes in India.
The  amount repatriated abroad should not exceed USD one million per financial year.
The  debit to the account should be only for the purpose of repatriation to the  account holder’s account maintained abroad.
There  should not be any other inflow / credit to this account other than that  mentioned at point (a) above.
AD  Category-I bank should put in place proper internal control mechanism to  monitor the credits and debits to this account.
The account should be closed immediately  after all the dues have been received and repatriated as per the declaration  made by the account holder mentioned at paragraph (a) above.
5.  Remittance of assets by NRI/PIO
5.1 A  Non-Resident Indian (NRI) or a Person of Indian Origin (PIO) may remit an  amount up to USD one million, per financial year, out of the balances held in  his Non- Resident (Ordinary) Rupee (NRO) account / sale proceeds of assets  (inclusive of assets acquired by way of inheritance or settlement), for all  bona fide purposes, subject to payment of applicable taxes in India, if any.
5.2 NRI/PIO  may remit sale proceeds of immovable property purchased by him out of Rupee  funds (or as a person resident in India) as indicated in paragraph 5.1 above  without any lock-in-period.
5.3 In  respect of remittance of sale proceeds of assets acquired by way of inheritance  or legacy or settlement for which there is no lock-in period, NRI / PIO may  submit to the Authorised Dealer documentary evidence in support of inheritance  or legacy of assets, an undertaking by the remitter in the prescribed formats.  Settlement is also a mode of inheritance from the parent, the only difference  being that the property under the settlement passes to the beneficiary on the  death of the owner/parent without any legal procedures/hassles and helps in  avoiding delay and inconvenience in applying for probate, etc. In case  settlement is done without retaining any life interest in the property i.e.  during the lifetime of the owner/parent, it would be tantamount to regular  transfer by way of gift. Therefore, if the property is received by NRI/PIO by  way of settlement without the settler retaining life interest, it may be  reckoned as transfer by way of gift and the remittance of sale proceeds of such  property would be guided by the extant instructions on remittance of balance in  the NRO account.
5.4 (a)  The remittance facility in respect of sale proceeds of immovable property is  not available to citizens of Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, China,  Afghanistan, Iran, Nepal and Bhutan.
A person or his successor who has acquired  immovable property in accordance with Section 6(5) of FEMA, 1999 cannot  repatriate sale proceeds of such property outside India except with prior  permission of the Reserve Bank.
(b) The facility of remittance of sale  proceeds of other financial assets is not available to citizens of Pakistan,  Bangladesh, Nepal and Bhutan.
6.  Remittance of Salary
6.1 A  citizen of a foreign State, resident in India, being an employee of a foreign  company or a citizen of India, employed by a foreign company outside India and  in either case on deputation to the office/ branch/ subsidiary/ joint venture/  group company in India of such foreign company may open, hold and maintain a  foreign currency account with a bank outside India and receive the whole salary  payable to him for the services rendered to the office/ branch/ subsidiary/  joint venture/ group company in India of such foreign company, by credit to  such account, provided that income tax chargeable under the Income-tax Act,1961  is paid on the entire salary as accrued in India.
6.2 A  citizen of a foreign state resident in India being in employment with a company  incorporated in India may open, hold and maintain a foreign currency account  with a bank outside India and remit the whole salary received in India in  Indian Rupees, to such account, for the services rendered to the Indian  company, provided that income-tax chargeable  under the Income-tax Act, 1961 is paid on the entire salary accrued in India.
[The  above provisions on remittance of Salary should be read with Schedule III (7)  of FEM (Current Account Transactions) Rules, 2000]
[The term ‘company’  will include a ‘Limited Liability Partnership’ as defined under the LLP Act,  2008]
7.  Repatriation of sale proceeds of residential property purchased by NRIs / PIO  out of foreign exchange *
7.1 Repatriation of sale proceeds of residential  property purchased by NRI / PIO is permitted to the extent of the amount paid  for acquisition of immovable property in foreign exchange received through  banking channels. The facility is restricted to not more than two such  properties. The balance amount can be credited to the NRO account and can be  remitted under USD one million facility as mentioned in paragraph 5.1.
7.2 Authorised  Dealer banks may permit repatriation of amounts representing the refund of  application / earnest money / purchase consideration made by the house building  agencies / seller on account of non-allotment of flat / plot / cancellation of  bookings / deals for purchase of residential / commercial property, together  with interest, if any (net of income tax payable thereon), provided the  original payment was made out of NRE/ FCNR (B) account of the account holder,  or remittance from outside India through normal banking channels and the  Authorized Dealer bank is satisfied about the genuineness of the transaction.  Such funds may also be credited to the NRE / FCNR (B) account of the NRI / PIO,  if they so desire.
7.3 Authorised  Dealer banks may allow repatriation of sale proceeds of residential  accommodation purchased by NRIs/ PIO out of funds raised by them by way of  loans from the authorized dealer banks / housing finance institutions to the  extent of such loan/s repaid by them out of foreign inward  remittances received through normal banking channel or by debit to their NRE/  FCNR(B) accounts.
(*Definition  of PIO for this purpose will be as stated in
Notification No. FEMA 1/2000-RB  dated 03.05.2000
.)
8.  Facilities for students
8.1 Students  going abroad for studies are treated as Non- Resident Indians (NRIs) and are  eligible for all the facilities available to NRIs under FEMA.
8.2 As  non-residents, they will be eligible to receive remittances from India (i) up  to USD 100,000 from close relatives in India, on self declaration, towards  maintenance, which could include remittances towards their studies also (ii) up  to USD 1 million per financial year, out of sale proceeds of assets / balances  in their NRO account maintained with an Authorised Dealer bank in India and  (iii) up to limits prescribed under the Liberalized Remittance Scheme.
8.3 All other facilities available to NRIs  under FEMA are equally applicable to the students.
8.4 Educational and other loans availed of by  them as residents in India will continue to be available as per FEMA  regulations.
9. Income-tax  clearance
The  remittances will be allowed to be made by the Authorized Dealer banks subject  to payment of applicable taxes in India, if any. Reserve Bank of India will not  issue any instructions under FEMA, 1999 clarifying tax issues. It shall be  mandatory on the part of Authorised Dealers to comply with the requirement of  tax laws, as applicable.
10. International  Credit Cards
Authorised Dealer banks have been permitted to  issue International Credit Cards to NRIs/ PIO, without prior approval of the  Reserve Bank. Such transactions may be settled by inward remittance or out of  balances held in the cardholder’s FCNR (B) / NRE/ NRO accounts.
Annex-1
Statement  / returns to be submitted to the Reserve Bank
Particulars of    statement
Periodicity
Relevant    instructions
Facilities    to NRIs/PIO and Foreign Nationals – Liberalisation    - Remittance from NRO account.
Monthly
A.P (DIR Series)    Circular No. 106 dated    February 18  2014
APPENDIX
List  of notifications/circulars which have been consolidated in this Master Circular
http://www.rbi.org.in/Scripts/BS_ApCircularsDisplay.aspx
http://www.rbi.org.in/Scripts/Bs_FemaNotifications.aspx
Sl. No.
Notification/Circular No.
Date
1.
Notification No.    FEMA 62/2002-RB
May 13, 2002
2.
Notification No.    FEMA 65/2002-RB
June 29,2002
3.
Notification No.    FEMA 93/2003-RB
June 9, 2003
4.
Notification No.    FEMA 97/2003-RB
July 8, 2003
5.
Notification No.    FEMA 119/2004-RB
June 29,2004
6.
Notification No.    FEMA 152/2007-RB
May 15, 2007
1.
A.P. (DIR Series)    Circular No.45
May 14, 2002
2.
A.P. (DIR Series)    Circular No.1
July 2, 2002
3.
A.P. (DIR Series)    Circular No.5
July 15, 2002
4.
A.P. (DIR Series)    Circular No.19
September 12, 2002
5.
A.P. (DIR Series)    Circular No.26
September 28, 2002
6.
A.P. (DIR Series)    Circular No.27
September 28, 2002
7.
A.P. (DIR Series)    Circular No.35
November 01, 2002
8.
A.P.(DIR Series)    Circular No.40
November 5, 2002
9.
A.P. (DIR Series)    Circular No.46
November 12, 2002
10.
A.P. (DIR Series)    Circular No.56
November 26, 2002
11.
A.P. (DIR Series)    Circular No.59
December 9, 2002
12.
A.P. (DIR Series)    Circular No.67
January 13, 2003
13.
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular    No.101
May 5, 2003
14.
A.P. (DIR Series)    Circular No.104
May 31, 2003
15.
A.P. (DIR Series)    Circular No.43
December 8, 2003
16.
A.P. (DIR Series)    Circular No.45
December 8, 2003
17.
A.P. (DIR Series)    Circular No.62
January 31, 2004
18.
A.P. (DIR Series)    Circular No.43
May 13,2005
19.
A.P. (DIR Series)    Circular No.12
November 16, 2006
20
A.P. (DIR Series)    Circular No.26
January 14, 2010
21.
A.P. (DIR Series)    Circular No 70
June 09, 2011
22.
A.P (DIR Series)    Circular No 82
February 11,2013
23.
A.P (DIR Series)    Circular No. 106
February 18, 2014
24.
A.P (DIR Series) Circular    No. 151
June 30, 2014
25.
A.P  (DIR series) Circular No 43
December  2, 2014
26.
A.P  (DIR Series) Circular No 62
January  22, 2015