(76 kb)
Master Circular – “Non-Banking Financial Companies Auditor’s Report (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2008.”
RBI/2014-15/37
DNBS (PD) CC No.382/ 03.02.001/2014-15
July 1, 2014
To
1. All  Non-Banking Financial Companies [Excluding RNBCs]
2. The President, Institute of Chartered  Accountants of India
Dear Sirs,
Master Circular – “Non-Banking  Financial Companies Auditor’s Report (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2008.”
As you  are aware, in order to have all current instructions on the subject at one  place, the Reserve Bank of India issues circulars / notifications. The  instructions contained in the
Notification No. DNBS.201/DG(VL)-2008 dated  September 18, 2008
updated as on June 30,  2014 are reproduced below. The updated notification has also been placed  on the RBI web-site (
http://www.rbi.org.in
).
Yours faithfully,
(K. K. Vohra)
Principal Chief General Manager
Table of Contents
Para No
Particulars
1
Short title, application and commencement of the Directions
2
Auditors to submit additional Report to the Board of Directors
3
Matters to be included in the auditor’s report
A. In the case of all non-banking financial companies
B. In the case of a non-banking financial company accepting/holding    public deposits
C. In the case of a non-banking financial company not accepting    public deposits
D. In the case of a company engaged in the business of non-banking    financial institution not required to hold CoR subject to certain conditions
4
Reasons to be stated for unfavourable or qualified statements
5
Obligation of auditor to submit an exception report to the Bank
6
Repeal and saving
Appendix
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT OF NON-BANKING SUPERVISION
CENTRAL OFFICE, CENTRE I, WORLD TRADE CENTRE
CUFFE PARADE, COLABA, MUMBAI 400 005
Notification No.DNBS. 201  /DG(VL)-2008 dated September 18, 2008
The Reserve Bank of India (hereinafter referred  to as "the Bank"), having considered it necessary in the public  interest and for the purpose of proper assessment of books of accounts of  NBFCs, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1A) of Section 45MA  of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (Act 2 of 1934) and of all the powers  enabling it in this behalf, and in supersession of the Non-Banking Financial  Companies Auditor’s Report (Reserve Bank) Directions, 1998, issues to every auditor  of every non-banking financial company, the Directions hereinafter specified.
1.
Short title,  Application and Commencement of the Directions
(i) These  Directions shall be known as “Non-Banking Financial Companies Auditor’s Report  (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2008.”
(ii) These Directions  shall apply to every auditor of a non-banking financial company as defined in  Section 45 I(f) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934) hereinafter  referred to as non-banking financial company.
(iii) These Directions shall come into force with immediate effect.
2.
Auditors to  submit additional Report to the Board of Directors
In  addition to the Report made by the auditor under Section 227 of the
1
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) on the accounts  of a non-banking financial company examined for every financial year ending on  any day on or after the commencement of these Directions, the auditor shall  also make a separate report to the Board of Directors of the Company on the  matters specified in paragraphs 3 and 4 below.
3.
Matters to be  included in the Auditor’s report
The auditor’s report on the accounts of a  non-banking financial company shall include a statement on the following  matters, namely:
-
(A) In the case of all  Non-Banking Financial Companies
I. Whether  the company is engaged in the business of non-banking financial institution and  whether it has obtained a Certificate of Registration (CoR) from the Bank
II. In the case of a  company holding CoR issued by the Bank, whether that company is entitled to  continue to hold such CoR in terms of its asset/income pattern as on March 31  of the applicable year.
Note: A reference in this regard is invited to  paragraph 15 of the Non-Banking Financial (Deposit Accepting or Holding)  Companies Prudential Norms (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2007 in respect of  deposit taking NBFCs and paragraph 15 of Non-Banking Financial (Non- Deposit  Accepting or Holding) Companies Prudential Norms (Reserve Bank) Directions,  2007 in respect of non-deposit taking NBFCs.
III.  Based on the criteria  set forth by the Bank in Company
Circular No. DNBS.PD. CC No. 85 / 03.02.089  /2006-07  dated December 6, 2006
for  classification of NBFCs as Asset Finance Company (AFC), whether the non-banking  financial company has been correctly classified as AFC as defined in  Non-Banking Financial Companies Acceptance of Public Deposits (Reserve Bank)  Directions, 1998  with reference to the  business carried on by it during the applicable financial year.
2
[IV. Based on the criteria set forth by the Bank in  the Notification viz. Non-Banking Financial Company- Micro Finance Institutions  (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2011 dated December 02, 2011 for classification of  NBFCs as NBFC-MFIs, whether the non-banking financial company has been  correctly classified as NBFC-MFI as defined in the said Directions with  reference to the business carried on by it during the applicable financial  year.]
(B) In the case of a non-banking financial company  accepting/holding public deposits
Apart from the matters enumerated in (A) above, the auditor shall  include a statement on the following matters, namely:-
(i) Whether  the public deposits accepted by the company together with other borrowings  indicated below viz.
(a) from public by issue of unsecured non-convertible  debentures/bonds;
(b) from its shareholders (if it is   a public limited company); and
(c) which are not excluded from  the definition of ‘public deposit’ in the Non-Banking Financial Companies  Acceptance of Public Deposits (Reserve Bank) Directions, 1998,are within the  limits admissible to the company as per the provisions of the Non-Banking  Financial Companies Acceptance of Public Deposits (Reserve Bank) Directions,  1998;
(ii) Whether the  public deposits held by the company in excess of the quantum of such deposits  permissible to it under the provisions of Non-Banking Financial Companies  Acceptance of Public Deposits (Reserve Bank) Directions, 1998 are regularised  in the manner provided in the said   Directions;
(iii) Whether  an Asset Finance Company having Capital to Risk Assets Ratio (CRAR) less than  15% or an Investment Company or a Loan Company as defined in paragraph  2(1)(ia), (vi) and (viii) respectively of Non-Banking Financial Companies  Acceptance of Public Deposits (Reserve Bank) Directions, 1998 is accepting "public  deposit” without minimum investment grade credit rating from an approved credit  rating agency;
(iv) In respect of NBFCs referred to in clause (iii) above,
whether the credit rating, for each of the fixed deposits schemes  that  has been assigned by one of the  Credit Rating Agencies listed in Non-Banking Financial Companies Acceptance of  Public Deposits (Reserve Bank) Directions, 1998 is in force; and
whether the aggregate amount of deposits outstanding  as at any point during the year has exceeded the limit specified by the such  Credit Rating Agency;
(v) In case of NBFCs having Net Owned Funds of Rs 25 lakh and  above but less than Rs 200 lakhs, whether the public deposit held by the  companies is in excess of the quantum of such deposit permissible to it in terms  of
Notification No. DNBS. 199/CGM (PK) - 2008 dated  June  17, 2008
and  whether such company :
(a) has frozen its level of  deposits as on the date of that Notification; or
(b) has brought down its level  of deposits to the level of revised ceiling of deposits in terms of that  Notification.
(vi) Whether the  company has defaulted in paying to its depositors the interest and /or  principal amount of the deposits after such interest and/or principal became  due;
(vii) Whether  the company has complied with the prudential norms on income recognition,  accounting standards, asset classification, provisioning for bad and doubtful  debts, and concentration of credit/investments as specified in the Directions  issued by the Reserve Bank of India in terms of the Non-Banking Financial  (Deposit Accepting or Holding) Companies Prudential Norms (Reserve Bank)  Directions, 2007.
(viii) Whether the capital adequacy ratio as  disclosed in the return submitted to the Bank in terms of the Non-Banking  Financial (Deposit Accepting or Holding) Companies Prudential Norms (Reserve  Bank) Directions, 2007 has been correctly determined and whether such ratio is  in compliance with the  minimum CRAR  prescribed   therein;
(ix) Whether  the  company   has  complied with the liquid assets  requirement as prescribed by the Bank in exercise of powers under section 45-IB  of the RBI Act  and whether the details  of the designated bank in which the   approved securities are held is communicated to the office concerned of  the Bank in terms  of
Notification  No.DNBS.172/CGM(OPA)-2003  dated   July 31, 2003
;
(x) Whether the company  has   furnished to the Bank within the stipulated period the return on  deposits as specified in the NBS 1 to the Non-Banking Financial Companies  Acceptance of Public Deposits (Reserve Bank) Directions, 1998;
(xi) Whether the company has  furnished to the Bank within the stipulated period the half-yearly return on  prudential norms as specified in the Non-Banking Financial (Deposit Accepting  or Holding) Companies Prudential Norms (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2007;
(xii) Whether, in the case of opening  of new branches or offices to collect deposits or in the case of closure of  existing branches/offices or   in the  case of appointment of agent, the company has complied with the requirements contained  in the Non-Banking Financial Companies Acceptance of Public Deposits (Reserve  Bank) Directions, 1998.
(C) In the case of a  non-banking financial company not accepting public deposits
Apart from the aspects  enumerated in (A) above, the auditor shall include a statement on the following  matters, namely: -
(i) Whether the Board of  Directors has passed a resolution for non- acceptance of any public deposits;
(ii) Whether the company has  accepted any public deposits during the relevant period/year;
(iii) Whether the company has  complied with the prudential norms relating to income recognition, accounting  standards, asset classification and provisioning for bad and doubtful debts as  applicable to it in terms of Non-Banking Financial (Non- Deposit Accepting or  Holding) Companies Prudential Norms (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2007;
(iv) In respect of Systemically  Important Non-deposit taking NBFCs as defined in paragraph 2(1)(xix) of the  Non-Banking Financial (Non- Deposit Accepting or Holding) Companies Prudential  Norms (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2007:
(a) Whether the capital adequacy ratio as  disclosed in the return submitted to the Bank in form NBS- 7, has been  correctly  arrived at and whether such  ratio is in compliance with the  minimum  CRAR prescribed  by the Bank;
(b) Whether  the company has furnished to the Bank the annual statement of capital funds,  risk assets/exposures and risk asset ratio (NBS-7) within the stipulated  period.
(D) In the case of a company engaged in the business of  non-banking financial institution not required to hold CoR subject to certain  conditions
Apart from the matters  enumerated in (A)(I) above where a company has obtained a specific advice from  the Bank  that it is not required to hold  COR from the Bank the auditor shall include a statement that the company is  complying with the conditions stipulated as advised by the Bank.
4.
Reasons to be stated for  unfavourable or qualified statements
Where, in the auditor’s  report, the statement regarding any of the items referred to in paragraph 3  above is unfavourable or qualified, the auditor’s report shall also state the  reasons for such unfavourable or qualified statement, as the case may be. Where  the auditor is unable to express any opinion on any of the items referred to in  paragraph 3 above, his report shall indicate such fact together with reasons  therefor.
5.
Obligation of  auditor to submit an exception report to the Bank
(I) Where, in the case of a non-banking financial company, the  statement regarding any of the items referred to in paragraph 3 above, is unfavorable  or qualified, or in the opinion of the auditor the company has not complied  with:
the provisions of Chapter  III B of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (Act 2 of 1934); or
the  Non-Banking Financial Companies Acceptance of  Public Deposits (Reserve Bank) Directions, 1998; or
Non-Banking Financial  (Deposit Accepting or Holding) Companies Prudential Norms (Reserve Bank)  Directions, 2007; or
Non-Banking Financial (Non- Deposit Accepting or  Holding) Companies Prudential Norms (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2007;
it shall be the obligation of the auditor to  make a report containing the details of such unfavourable or qualified  statements and/or about the non-compliance, as the case may be, in respect of  the company to the concerned Regional Office of the Department of Non-Banking  Supervision of the Bank under whose jurisdiction the registered office of the  company is located as per Second Schedule to the Non-Banking Financial  Companies Acceptance of Public Deposits (Reserve Bank) Directions, 1998.
(II) The duty of the Auditor  under sub-paragraph (I) shall be to report only the contraventions of the  provisions of RBI Act, 1934, and Directions, Guidelines, instructions referred  to in sub-paragraph (1) and such report shall not contain any statement with  respect to compliance of any of those provisions.
6.
Repeal and saving
The Non-Banking Financial Companies Auditor’s Report (Reserve  Bank) Directions, 1998 shall stand repealed by these Directions.
Notwithstanding such repeal,
(a) any action taken, purported to have been taken or initiated  under the Directions hereby repealed shall, continue to be governed by the  provisions of said Directions
(b) any reference in other Notifications issued  by the Bank containing reference to the said repealed Directions, shall mean  reference to these Directions, namely, Non-Banking Financial Companies  Auditor’s Report (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2008 after the date of repeal.
(V.  Leeladhar)
DEPUTY GOVERNOR
Appendix
List of Circulars
Sr. No.
Circular No.
Date
1
Notification No. DNBS. 201 /DG(VL)-2008
September 18,    2008
2
DNBS.PD.No.236    /CGM(US)-2011
December    02, 2011
1
Footnote: The  Reference to Companies Act, 1956 in the Master Circular will be changed as and  when change is effected in the original circular/notifications.
2
Inserted vide
Notification  DNBS.PD.No.236 /CGM(US)-2011 dated December 02, 2011
.