(1295 kb)
Master Circular - Prudential norms on Income Recognition, Asset Classification and Provisioning pertaining to Advances
RBI/2014-15/74
DBOD.No.BP.BC.9/21.04.048/2014-15
July 1, 2014
All Commercial Banks  (excluding RRBs)
Dear Sir
Master Circular - Prudential norms on Income  Recognition, Asset Classification and Provisioning pertaining to Advances
Please  refer to the
Master  Circular No. DBOD.No.BP.BC.1/21.04.048/2013-14 dated July 1, 2013
consolidating instructions / guidelines issued to banks till June 30, 2013 on  matters relating to prudential norms on income recognition, asset  classification and provisioning pertaining to advances.
2.  The
Master Circular
has now been suitably updated by incorporating instructions  issued up to June 30, 2014 and is attached. It has also been placed on the RBI  web-site (
http://www.rbi.org.in
). We  advise that this revised Master Circular consolidates the instructions  contained in the circulars listed in the Annex 7.
Yours faithfully
(Rajesh Verma)
Chief General Manager-in-Charge
Encl.: As above
MASTER CIRCULAR - PRUDENTIAL NORMS ON INCOME  RECOGNITION, ASSET CLASSIFICATION AND PROVISIONING PERTAINING TO ADVANCES
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Para No.
Particulars
PART A
1
GENERAL
2
DEFINITIONS
2.1
Non-performing    assets
2.2
‘Out    of Order' status
2.3
‘Overdue’
3
INCOME RECOGNITION
3.1
Income    recognition ­policy
3.2
Reversal    of income
3.3
Appropriation    of recovery in NPAs
3.4
Interest    Application
3.5
Computation    of NPA levels
4
ASSET    CLASSIFICATION
4.1
Categories    of NPAs
4.1.1
Sub­standard    Assets
4.1.2
Doubtful    Assets
4.1.3
Loss    Assets
4.2
Guidelines    for classification of assets
4.2.3
Availability    of security / net worth of borrower/ guarantor
4.2.4
Accounts    with temporary deficiencies
4.2.5
Upgradation    of loan accounts classified as NPAs
4.2.6
Accounts    regularised near about the balance sheet date
4.2.7
Asset    Classification to be borrower wise and not facility-­wise
4.2.8
Advances    under consortium arrangements
4.2.9
Accounts    where there is erosion in the value of security
4.2.10
Advances    to PACS/FSS ceded to Commercial Banks
4.2.11
Advances    against Term Deposits, NSCs, KVP/IVP, etc
4.2.12
Loans    with moratorium for payment of interest
4.2.13
Agricultural    advances
4.2.14
Government    guaranteed advances
4.2.15
Projects    under implementation
4.2.16
Take­out    Finance
4.2.17
Post­-shipment    Supplier's Credit
4.2.18
Export    Project Finance
4.2.19
Advances    under rehabilitation approved by BIFR/ TLI
4.2.20
Transactions Involving Transfer of Assets through Direct Assignment of    Cash Flows and the Underlying Securities
4.2.21
Credit Card Accounts
5
PROVISIONING NORMS
5.1
General
5.2
Loss    assets
5.3
Doubtful    assets
5.4
Sub­standard    assets
5.5
Standard    assets
5.6
Floating    provisions
5.7
Provisions    for advances at higher than prescribed rates
5.8
Provisions    on Leased Assets
5.9
Guidelines    for Provisions under Special Circumstances
5.10
Provisioning    Coverage Ratio
6
GUIDELINES ON SALE    OF FINANCIAL ASSETS TO SECURITISATION COMPANY (SC)/ RECONSTRUCTION COMPANY    (RC)
6.1
Scope
6.2
Structure
6.3
Financial    assets which can be sold
6.4
Procedure    for sale of banks’/ FIs’ financial assets to
SC/ RC, including valuation and pricing aspects
6.5
Prudential    norms for banks/ FIs for the sale transactions
6.6
Disclosure    Requirements
6.7
Related    Issues
7
GUIDELINES ON    PURCHASE/SALE OF NON PERFORMING ASSETS
7.1
Scope
7.2
Structure
7.3
Procedure    for purchase/ sale of non performing financial assets, including valuation    and pricing aspects
7.4
Prudential    norms for banks for the purchase/ sale transactions
7.5
Disclosure    Requirements
8
WRITING­ OFF OF    NPAs
9
NPA Management –    Requirement of an Effective Mechanism and Granular Data
PART B
Prudential guidelines on Restructuring of Advances
10
Background on    Restructuring of advances
11
Key Concepts
12
General Principles and Prudential Norms for Restructured Advances
12.1
Eligibility    criteria for restructuring of advances
12.2
Asset    classification norms
12.3
Income    recognition norms
12.4
Provisioning    norms
12.5
Risk Weights
13
Prudential Norms for Conversion of Principal into Debt / Equity
13.1
Asset classification norms
13.2
Income recognition norms
13.3
Valuation and provisioning norms
14
Prudential Norms for Conversion of Unpaid    Interest into 'Funded Interest Term Loan'    (FITL), Debt or Equity Instruments
14.1
Asset classification norms
14.2
Income recognition norms
14.3
Valuation and provisioning norms
15
Special Regulatory Treatment for Asset    Classification
15.1
Applicability of special regulatory treatment
15.2
Elements of special regulatory framework
16
Miscellaneous
17
Disclosures
18
Objective of Restructuring
Appendix to Part B
Part – C  
          Early Recognition of Financial Distress, Prompt Steps for Resolution and    Fair Recovery for Lenders: Framework for Revitalising Distressed Assets in the    Economy
Part – C1 
          Framework for Revitalising    Distressed Assets in the Economy - Guidelines on Joint Lenders' Forum (JLF)    and Corrective Action Plan (CAP)
19
Introduction
20
Guidelines on Joint Lenders’ Forum (JLF) and    Corrective Action Plan (CAP)
21
Formation of Joint Lenders’ Forum
22
Corrective Action by JLF
23
Restructuring Process
24
Other Issues / Conditions Relating to    Restructuring by JLF / CDR Cell
25
Prudential Norms on Asset Classification and    Provisioning
26
Accelerated Provisioning
27
Wilful Defaulters and Non-Cooperative Borrowers
28
Dissemination of Information
29
Effective Date of Implementation of the Framework
Appendix to Part C-1
Part C-2
C-2: Framework for    Revitalising Distressed Assets in the Economy - 
          Refinancing of Project Loans, Sale of NPA and Other Regulatory Measures
30
Introduction
31
Refinancing of Project Loans
32
Bank Loans for Financing Promoters’ Contribution
33
Credit Risk Management
34
Reinforcement of Regulatory Instructions
35
Registration of Transactions with CERSAI
36
Board Oversight
Appendix to Part C-2
ANNEXES
Annex -1
Details    of Gross Advances, Gross NPAs, Net Advances and Net NPA
Annex -2
List    of relevant direct agricultural advances
Annex -3
Format    for Computing Provisioning Coverage Ratio (PCR)
Annex -4
Organisational Framework    for Restructuring of Advances Under Consortium / Multiple Banking / Syndication    Arrangements
Annex -5
Key Concepts in Restructuring
Annex -6
Particulars of Accounts Restructured
Annex -7
List    of circulars consolidated by the Master Circular
Master  Circular - Prudential Norms on Income Recognition,
Asset  Classification and Provisioning pertaining to Advances
Part A
1.
GENERAL
1.1 In  line with the international practices and as per the  recommendations made by the Committee on the Financial System (Chairman  Shri M. Narasimham), the Reserve Bank of India has introduced, in a  phased manner, prudential norms for income recognition, asset  classification and provisioning for the advances portfolio of the  banks so as to move towards greater consistency and  transparency in the published accounts.
1.2 The  policy of income recognition should be objective and based on record of  recovery rather than on any subjective considerations. Likewise, the  classification of assets of banks has to be done on the  basis of objective criteria which would ensure a uniform and consistent  application of the norms. Also, the provisioning should be made on the  basis of the classification of assets based on the period for which  the asset has remained non­-performing and the availability of  security and the realisable value thereof.
1.3 Banks are  urged to ensure that while granting loans and advances, realistic  repayment schedules may be fixed on the basis of cash  flows with borrowers. This would go a long way to facilitate prompt  repayment by the borrowers and thus improve the record of  recovery in advances.
2.
DEFINITIONS
2.1 Non ­performing Assets
2.1.1  An asset, including a leased asset,  becomes non­ performing when it ceases  to  generate income for the bank.
2.1.2 A non ­performing asset (NPA) is a loan  or an advance where;
interest  and/ or instalment of principal remain overdue for a period of more than 90  days in respect of a term loan,
the  account remains ‘out of order’ as indicated at paragraph 2.2 below, in  respect of an Overdraft/Cash Credit (OD/CC),
the bill  remains overdue for a period of more than 90 days in the case of  bills purchased and discounted,
the  instalment of principal or interest thereon remains overdue for two crop  seasons for short duration crops,
the instalment of principal or interest thereon  remains overdue for one crop season for long duration crops,
the  amount of liquidity facility remains outstanding for more than 90 days, in  respect of a securitisation transaction undertaken in terms of guidelines on  securitisation dated February 1, 2006.
in respect of derivative transactions, the overdue  receivables representing positive mark-to-market value of a derivative  contract, if these remain unpaid for a period of 90 days from the specified due  date for payment.
2.1.3  In  case of interest payments, banks should, classify an account  as NPA only if the interest due and charged during any quarter  is not serviced fully within 90 days from the end of the  quarter.
2.1.4 In addition, an account may also be  classified as NPA in terms of paragraph 4.2.4 of this Master Circular.
2.2 ‘Out of Order’ status
An account should be treated as
'out of order'
if the outstanding  balance remains continuously in excess of the sanctioned  limit/drawing power. In cases where the outstanding balance in the  principal operating account is less than the sanctioned limit/drawing  power, but there are no credits continuously for 90  days as on the date of Balance Sheet or credits are not enough  to cover the interest debited during the same period, these  accounts should be treated as
'out  of order'
.
2.3   ‘Overdue’
Any amount due to the bank under  any credit facility is ‘overdue’ if it is not paid on the  due date fixed by the bank.
3.
INCOME  RECOGNITION
3.1   Income Recognition Policy
3.1.1  The  policy of income recognition has to be objective and based on the  record of recovery. Internationally income from non­-performing  assets (NPA) is not recognised on accrual basis but  is booked as income only when it is actually received.  Therefore, the banks should not charge and take to income account interest  on any NPA.
This will apply to  Government guaranteed accounts also.
3.1.2  However,  interest on advances against Term Deposits, National Savings Certificates  (NSCs), Indira Vikas Patras (IVPs), Kisan Vikas Patras (KVPs) and Life  policies may be taken to income account on the due date, provided  adequate margin is available in the accounts.
3.1.3  Fees and  commissions earned by the banks as a result of re­negotiations or  rescheduling of outstanding debts should be recognised on an accrual  basis over the period of time covered by the re­negotiated or  rescheduled extension of credit.
3.2   Reversal of income
3.2.1  If  any advance, including bills purchased and discounted, becomes NPA,  the entire interest accrued and credited to income account in the past periods,  should be reversed if the same is not realised.
This will apply to Government guaranteed accounts also.
3.2.2  In  respect of NPAs, fees, commission and similar income that have accrued should  cease to accrue in the current period and should be reversed with respect to  past periods, if uncollected.
3.2.3
Leased  Assets
The finance  charge component of finance income [as defined in ‘AS 19 ­Leases’  issued by the Council of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of  India (ICAI)] on the leased asset which has accrued and was credited  to income account before the asset became non­performing, and remaining  unrealised, should be reversed or provided for in the current accounting period.
3.3   Appropriation of recovery in NPAs
3.3.1  Interest  realised on NPAs may be taken to income account provided the  credits in the accounts towards interest are not out of fresh/  additional credit facilities sanctioned to the borrower concerned.
3.3.2  In  the absence of a clear agreement between the bank and the borrower for the  purpose of appropriation of recoveries in NPAs (i.e.  towards principal or interest due), banks should adopt an accounting  principle and exercise the right of appropriation of recoveries in a  uniform and consistent manner.
3.4 Interest Application
On an account turning NPA, banks should reverse  the interest already charged and not collected by debiting Profit and Loss  account, and stop further application of interest. However, banks may continue  to record such accrued interest in a Memorandum account in their books. For the  purpose of computing Gross Advances, interest recorded in the Memorandum  account should not be taken into account.
3.5 Computation of NPA levels
Banks are advised to compute their Gross  Advances, Net Advances, Gross NPAs and Net NPAs, as per the format in
Annex  -1
.
4.
ASSET  CLASSIFICATION
4.1   Categories of NPAs
Banks are required to classify non­performing  assets further into the following three categories based on the  period for which the asset has remained non­performing and the  realisability of the dues:
Sub­standard Assets
Doubtful Assets
Loss Assets
4.1.1
Sub­standard  Assets
With effect from March 31, 2005, a sub­standard  asset would be one, which has remained NPA for a period less than or equal to  12 months. Such an asset will have well defined credit weaknesses that  jeopardise the liquidation of the debt and are characterised by the  distinct possibility that the banks will sustain some loss, if  deficiencies are not corrected.
4.1.2
Doubtful Assets
With effect from March 31, 2005, an asset would  be classified as doubtful if it has remained in the sub­standard category for a  period of 12 months. A loan classified as doubtful has all the  weaknesses inherent in assets that were classified as sub­standard,  with the added characteristic that the weaknesses make collection or  liquidation in full, – on the basis of currently known facts,  conditions and values – highly questionable and improbable.
4.1.3
Loss Assets
A loss asset is one where  loss has been identified by the bank or internal or  external auditors or the RBI inspection but the amount has not been  written off wholly. In other words, such an asset is considered  uncollectible and of such little value that its continuance as a bankable  asset is not warranted although there may be some salvage or  recovery value.
4.2   Guidelines for classification of  assets
4.2.1  Broadly speaking,  classification of assets into above categories should be done taking  into account the degree of well-­defined credit weaknesses and the extent  of dependence on collateral security for realisation of dues.
4.2.2  Banks should  establish appropriate internal systems (including technology enabled processes)  for proper and timely identification of NPAs, especially in respect of  high value accounts. The banks may fix a minimum cut off point to  decide what would constitute a high value account depending upon their  respective business levels. The cutoff point should be valid for the  entire accounting year. Responsibility and validation levels for  ensuring proper asset classification may be fixed by the banks. The  system should ensure that doubts in asset classification due to  any reason are settled through specified internal channels within one  month from the date on which the account would have been classified as NPA  as per extant guidelines.
4.2.3
Availability of  security / net worth of borrower/ guarantor
The availability of security or net  worth of borrower/ guarantor should not be taken into account for the purpose  of treating an advance as NPA or otherwise, except to the extent provided  in Para 4.2.9.
4.2.4
Accounts with  temporary deficiencies
The classification of an asset as NPA  should be based on the record of recovery. Bank should not  classify an advance account as NPA merely due to the existence  of some deficiencies which are temporary in nature such as non­-availability of  adequate drawing power based on the latest available stock statement,  balance outstanding exceeding the limit temporarily, non­-submission of stock   statements  and non­-renewal of the limits on the due date, etc. In  the matter of classification of accounts with such  deficiencies banks may follow the following guidelines:
i)  Banks should  ensure that drawings in the working capital accounts are covered by  the adequacy of current assets, since current assets are first  appropriated in times of distress. Drawing power is required to be  arrived at based on the stock statement which is current. However,  considering the difficulties of large borrowers, stock  statements relied upon by the banks for determining drawing  power should not be older than three months. The outstanding in the account  based on drawing power calculated from stock statements older than  three months, would be deemed as irregular.
A working capital borrowal account will become  NPA if such irregular drawings are permitted in the account for a  continuous period of 90 days even though the unit may be working or  the borrower's financial position is satisfactory.
ii)   Regular  and ad hoc credit limits need to be reviewed/ regularised not later  than three months from the due date/date of ad hoc sanction. In case  of constraints such as non-­availability of financial statements and  other data from the borrowers, the branch should furnish evidence to show that  renewal/ review of credit limits is already on and would be completed  soon. In any case, delay beyond six months is not considered  desirable as a general discipline. Hence, an account where the regular/ ad  hoc credit limits have not been reviewed/ renewed within 180 days from  the due date/ date of ad hoc sanction will be treated as NPA.
4.2.5
Upgradation  of loan accounts classified as NPAs
If arrears of interest and principal are  paid by the borrower in the case of loan accounts classified  as NPAs, the account should no longer be treated as non­performing  and may be classified as ‘standard’ accounts. With regard to  upgradation of a restructured/ rescheduled account which is classified  as NPA contents of paragraphs 12.2 and 15.2 in the Part B of  this circular will be applicable.
4.2.6
Accounts regularised  near about the balance sheet date
The asset classification of borrowal  accounts where a solitary or a few credits are recorded before  the balance sheet date should be handled with care and without scope for  subjectivity. Where the account indicates inherent weakness on the  basis of the data available, the account should be deemed as a NPA. In other  genuine cases, the banks must furnish satisfactory evidence to the  Statutory Auditors/Inspecting Officers about the manner of regularisation  of the account to eliminate doubts on their performing status.
4.2.7
Asset  Classification to be borrower­-wise and not facility­-wise
i)  It is difficult to envisage a  situation when only one facility to a borrower/one investment in  any of the securities issued by the borrower becomes a  problem credit/investment and not others. Therefore, all the facilities granted  by a bank to a borrower and investment in all the  securities issued by the borrower will have to be treated  as NPA/NPI and not the particular facility/investment or part thereof  which has become irregular.
ii)   If the debits arising out of  devolvement of letters of credit or invoked guarantees are parked in a  separate account, the balance outstanding in that account also should be  treated as a part of the borrower’s principal operating account for  the purpose of application of prudential norms on income recognition, asset  classification and provisioning.
iii) The bills discounted under  LC favouring a borrower may not be classified as a Non-performing advance  (NPA), when any other facility granted to the borrower is classified as NPA.  However, in case documents under LC are not accepted on presentation or the  payment under the LC is not made on the due date by the LC issuing bank for any  reason and the borrower does not immediately make good the amount disbursed as  a result of discounting of concerned bills, the outstanding bills discounted  will immediately be classified as NPA with effect from the date when the other  facilities had been classified as NPA.
iv) Derivative Contracts
a) The  overdue receivables representing positive mark-to-market value of a derivative  contract will be treated as a non-performing asset, if these remain unpaid for  90 days or more. In case the overdues arising from forward contracts and plain  vanilla swaps and options become NPAs, all other funded facilities granted to  the client shall also be classified as non-performing asset following the  principle of borrower-wise classification as per the existing asset  classification norms. However, any amount, representing positive mark-to-market  value of the foreign exchange derivative contracts (other than forward contract  and plain vanilla swaps and options) that were entered into during the period  April 2007 to June 2008, which has already crystallised or might crystallise in  future and is / becomes receivable from the client, should be parked in a separate  account maintained in the name of the client / counterparty. This amount, even  if overdue for a period of 90 days or more, will not make other funded  facilities provided to the client, NPA on account of the principle of  borrower-wise asset classification, though such receivable overdue for 90 days  or more shall itself be classified as NPA, as per the extant Income Recognition  and Asset Classification (IRAC) norms. The classification of all other assets  of such clients will, however, continue to be governed by the extant IRAC  norms.
b) If  the client concerned is also a borrower of the bank enjoying a Cash Credit or  Overdraft facility from the bank, the receivables mentioned at item (iv) (a)  above may be debited to that account on due date and the impact of its  non-payment would be reflected in the cash credit / overdraft facility account.  The principle of borrower-wise asset classification would be applicable  here also, as per extant norms.
c) In  cases where the contract provides for settlement of the current mark-to-market  value of a derivative contract before its maturity, only the current credit  exposure (not the potential future exposure) will be classified as a  non-performing asset after an overdue period of 90 days.
d) As  the overdue receivables mentioned above would represent unrealised income  already booked by the bank on accrual basis, after 90 days of overdue period,  the amount already taken to 'Profit and Loss a/c' should be reversed, and held  in a ‘Suspense Account-Crystalised Receivables’ in the same manner as done in  the case of overdue advances.
e)  Further, in cases where the derivative contracts provides for more settlements  in future, the MTM value will comprise of (a) crystallised receivables and (b)  positive or negative MTM in respect of future receivables. If the derivative  contract is not terminated on the overdue receivable remaining unpaid for 90  days, in addition to reversing the crystallised receivable from Profit and Loss  Account as stipulated in para  (d) above,  the positive MTM pertaining to future receivables may also be reversed from  Profit and Loss Account to another account styled as ‘Suspense Account –  Positive MTM’. The subsequent positive changes in the MTM value may be credited  to the ‘Suspense Account – Positive MTM’, not to P&L Account. The  subsequent decline in MTM value may be adjusted against the balance in  ‘Suspense Account – Positive MTM’. If the balance in this account is not  sufficient, the remaining amount may be debited to the P&L Account. On  payment of the overdues in cash, the balance in the ‘Suspense  Account-Crystalised Receivables’ may be transferred to the ‘Profit and Loss  Account’, to the extent payment is received.
f)  If the bank has other derivative exposures on the borrower, it follows that the  MTMs of other derivative exposures should also be dealt with / accounted for in  the manner as described in para (e) above, subsequent to the crystalised/settlement  amount in respect of a particular derivative transaction being treated as NPA.
g) Since the legal  position regarding bilateral netting is not unambiguously clear, receivables  and payables from/to the same counterparty including that relating to a single  derivative contract should not be netted.
h) Similarly, in case a fund-based credit facility  extended to a borrower is classified as NPA, the MTMs of all the derivative  exposures should be treated in the manner discussed above.
4.2.8
Advances under  consortium arrangements
Asset classification of accounts under  consortium should be based on the
record  of recovery of the individual member banks
and other aspects having a  bearing on the recoverability of the advances. Where the  remittances by the borrower under consortium lending  arrangements are pooled with one bank and/or where the bank receiving  remittances is not parting with the share of other member banks, the  account will be treated as not serviced in the books of the other  member banks and therefore, be treated as NPA. The  banks participating in the consortium should, therefore, arrange to get their  share of recovery transferred from the lead bank or get an  express consent from the lead bank for the transfer of their share of  recovery, to ensure proper asset classification in their respective books.
4.2.9
Accounts where  there is erosion in the value of security/frauds committed by  borrowers
In respect of accounts where there are  potential threats for recovery on account of erosion in the value of  security or non­-availability of security and existence of other  factors such as frauds committed by borrowers it will  not be prudent that such accounts should go through  various stages of asset classification. In cases of such  serious credit impairment the asset should be straightaway classified  as doubtful or loss asset as appropriate:
Erosion in the value of security can  be reckoned as significant when the realisable value of the  security is less than 50 per cent of the value assessed  by the bank or accepted by RBI at the time of last inspection, as the  case may be. Such NPAs may be straightaway classified under  doubtful category and provisioning should be made as applicable to  doubtful assets.
If  the realisable value of the security, as assessed by the bank/ approved  valuers/ RBI is less than 10 per cent of the outstanding in the  borrowal accounts, the existence of security should be ignored  and the asset should be straightaway  classified as loss asset. It may be either written off or  fully provided for by the bank.
4.2.10
Advances to  Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS)/Farmers’ Service Societies (FSS)  ceded to Commercial Banks
In respect of agricultural  advances as well as advances for other  purposes granted by banks to PACS/ FSS under the on-­lending  system, only that particular credit facility granted to PACS/ FSS  which is in default for a period of two crop seasons in case of short  duration crops and one crop season in case of long duration crops, as the  case may be, after it has become due will be classified as NPA  and not all the credit facilities sanctioned to a PACS/ FSS. The other  direct loans & advances, if any, granted by the bank to the  member borrower of a PACS/ FSS outside the on­-lending arrangement will become  NPA even if one of the credit facilities granted to the same borrower  becomes NPA.
4.2.11
Advances against  Term Deposits, NSCs, KVPs/IVPs, etc.
Advances against term deposits,  NSCs eligible for surrender, IVPs, KVPs and life policies need  not be treated as NPAs, provided adequate margin is available in the  accounts. Advances against gold ornaments, government securities and  all other securities are not covered by this exemption.
4.2.12
Loans with  moratorium for payment of interest
In the case of bank finance given for  industrial projects or for agricultural plantations etc. where  moratorium is available for payment of interest, payment of interest  becomes 'due' only after the moratorium or gestation period  is over. Therefore, such amounts of interest do not become overdue  and hence do not become NPA, with reference to the date of debit of interest.  They become overdue after due date for payment of interest, if  uncollected.
In  the case of housing loan or similar advances granted to staff members  where interest is payable after recovery of principal, interest need  not be considered as overdue from the first quarter onwards. Such  loans/advances should be classified as NPA only when there is a  default in repayment of instalment of principal or payment of interest on the  respective due dates.
4.2.13
Agricultural  advances
A  loan granted for short duration crops will be treated as NPA, if the  instalment of principal or interest thereon remains overdue for two crop  seasons. A loan granted for long duration crops will be treated  as NPA, if the instalment of principal or interest thereon remains overdue  for one crop season. For the purpose of these guidelines, “long duration”  crops would be crops with crop season longer than one year and crops,  which are not “long duration” crops, would be treated as “short duration”  crops. The crop season for each crop, which means the period up to  harvesting of the crops raised, would be as determined by the  State Level Bankers’ Committee in each State. Depending upon the duration of  crops raised by an agriculturist, the above NPA norms would also  be made applicable to agricultural term loans availed of by him. The above  norms should be made applicable to all direct agricultural  advances as listed at paragraph III (1.1) of the Circular on Priority  Sector Lending – Targets and Classification  RPCD.CO.Plan.BC.9/04.09.01/2013-14 dated July 1,  2013. An extract of the list of these items is furnished in the
Annex - 2
. In respect of agricultural  loans, other than those specified in the Annex - 2 and term loans given to  non­-agriculturists, identification of NPAs would be done on the same  basis as non­-agricultural advances, which, at present, is the  90 days delinquency norm.
Where  natural calamities impair the repaying capacity of agricultural borrowers, banks may decide on their own as a relief measure ­conversion  of the short-term production loan into a term loan or re­-schedulement of the  repayment period; and the sanctioning of fresh short-term loan, subject to  guidelines contained in RBI circular RPCD. No.PLFS.BC.6/05.04.02/2013­-14  dated July 1, 2013.
In  such cases of conversion or re-­schedulement, the term loan as well  as fresh short-term loan may be treated as current dues and need  not be classified as NPA. The asset classification of these loans would  thereafter be governed by the revised terms & conditions and  would be treated as NPA if interest and/or instalment of principal  remains overdue for two crop seasons for short duration  crops and for one crop season for long duration crops. For the purpose of  these guidelines, "long duration" crops would be  crops with crop season longer than one year and crops, which are not 'long  duration" would be treated as "short  duration" crops.
While fixing the repayment schedule in case of rural  housing advances granted to agriculturists under Indira Awas Yojana  and Golden Jubilee Rural Housing Finance Scheme, banks should ensure that  the interest/instalment payable on such advances are linked to crop  cycles.
4.2.14
Government  guaranteed advances
The credit facilities backed  by guarantee of the Central Government though overdue may be treated  as NPA only when the Government repudiates its guarantee when  invoked. This exemption from classification of Government guaranteed  advances as NPA is not for the purpose of recognition of income. The  requirement of invocation of guarantee has been delinked for deciding the  asset classification and provisioning requirements in respect of State  Government guaranteed exposures. With effect from the year ending March 31, 2006  State Government guaranteed advances and investments in State  Government guaranteed securities would attract asset classification and  provisioning norms if interest and/or principal or any other amount  due to the bank remains overdue for more than 90 days.
4.2.15
Projects under  implementation
4.2.15.1 For all projects financed  by the FIs/ banks
after May 28,  2002
, the ‘Date of Completion’ and the ‘Date of Commencement of Commercial  Operations’ (DCCO),  of the project  should be clearly spelt out at the time of financial closure of the  project and the same should be formally documented. These should also be  documented in the appraisal note by the bank during sanction of the loan.
4.2.15.2
Project Loans
There are occasions when the completion of  projects is delayed for legal and other extraneous reasons like delays in  Government approvals etc. All these factors, which are beyond the control of  the promoters, may lead to delay in project implementation and involve  restructuring / reschedulement of loans by banks. Accordingly, the following  asset classification norms would apply to the project loans before commencement  of commercial operations.
For this purpose, all  project loans have been divided into the following two categories:
(a)   Project Loans for infrastructure sector
(b)  Project Loans for  non-infrastructure sector
For the purpose of these guidelines, 'Project  Loan' would mean any term loan which has been extended for the purpose of  setting up of an economic venture. Further, Infrastructure Sector is a sector  as defined in extant RBI circular on 'Definition of Infrastructure Lending'.
4.2.15.3
Project Loans for Infrastructure Sector
(i) A  loan for an infrastructure project will be classified as NPA during any time  before commencement of commercial operations as per record of recovery (90 days  overdue), unless it is restructured and becomes eligible for classification as  'standard asset' in terms of paras (iii) to (v) below.
(ii)  A  loan for an infrastructure project will be classified as NPA if it fails to  commence commercial operations within two years from the original DCCO, even if  it is regular as per record of recovery, unless it is restructured and becomes  eligible for classification as 'standard asset' in terms of paras (iii) to (v)  below.
(iii)  If a project loan classified as 'standard asset' is
restructured
any time during the period up to two years from the original date of  commencement of commercial operations (DCCO), in accordance with the provisions  of Part B of this Master Circular, it can be retained as a standard asset if  the fresh DCCO is fixed within the following limits, and further provided the  account continues to be serviced as per the restructured terms.
(a)  Infrastructure  Projects involving court cases
Up to another 2 years (beyond the  existing extended period of 2 years, as prescribed in para 4.2.15.3 (ii), i.e.,  total extension of 4 years), in case the reason for extension of date of  commencement of production is arbitration proceedings or a court case.
(b)  Infrastructure Projects delayed for other reasons beyond the control of  promoters
Up to another 1 year (beyond the existing extended  period of 2 years, as prescribed in para 4.2.15.3 (ii), i.e., total extension  of 3 years), in other than court cases.
(iv)    It is re-iterated that the dispensation in para 4.2.15.3 (iii) is subject to  adherence to the provisions regarding restructuring of accounts as contained in  the Master Circular which would inter alia require that the application for  restructuring should be received before the expiry of period of two years from  the original DCCO and when the account is still standard as per record of  recovery. The other conditions applicable would be:
a.  In cases where  there is moratorium for payment of interest, banks should not book income on  accrual basis beyond two years from the original DCCO, considering the high  risk involved in such restructured accounts.
b.  Banks should maintain following provisions  on such accounts as long as these are classified as standard assets  in addition to provision for diminution in  fair value due to extension of DCCO:
Particulars
Provisioning Requirement
If the revised DCCO is    within two years from the original DCCO prescribed at the    time of financial closure
0.40 per cent
If the DCCO is    extended beyond two years and upto four years or three years from the    original DCCO, as the case may be, depending upon the reasons for such delay
Project loans    restructured with effect from June 1, 2013:
5.00 per cent – From the date of such    restructuring till the revised DCCO or 2 years from the date of restructuring,    whichever is later
Stock of project    loans classified as restructured as on June 1, 2013:
* 3.50 per cent - with effect from March 31, 2014 (spread over the    four quarters of 2013-14)
* 4.25 per cent - with effect from March 31, 2015 (spread over the four    quarters of 2014-15)
* 5.00 per cent - - with effect from March 31, 2016 (spread over the    four quarters of 2015-16)
The above provisions will be applicable    from the date of restructuring till    the revised DCCO or 2 years from the date of restructuring, whichever is    later.
(v)  For  the purpose of these guidelines, mere extension of DCCO would not be considered  as restructuring, if the revised DCCO falls within the period of two years from  the original DCCO. In such cases the consequential shift in repayment period by  equal or shorter duration (including the start date and end date of revised  repayment schedule) than the extension of DCCO would also not be considered as  restructuring provided all other terms and conditions of the loan remain  unchanged. As such project loans will be treated as standard assets in all  respects, they will attract standard asset provision of 0.40 per cent.
(vi) In case of infrastructure projects under  implementation, where Appointed Date (as defined in the concession agreement)  is shifted due to the inability of the Concession Authority to comply with the  requisite conditions, change in date of commencement of commercial operations  (DCCO) need not be treated as ‘restructuring’, subject to following conditions:
a)  The project is an infrastructure project under public private partnership model  awarded by a public authority;
b)  The loan disbursement is yet to begin;
c)  The revised date of commencement of commercial operations is documented by way  of a supplementary agreement between the borrower and lender and;
d) Project viability has been reassessed and sanction  from appropriate authority has been obtained at the time of supplementary  agreement.
4.2.15.4
Project Loans for  Non-Infrastructure Sector (Other than Commercial Real Estate Exposures)
(i) A  loan for a non-infrastructure project will be classified as NPA during any time  before commencement of commercial operations as per record of recovery (90 days  overdue), unless it is restructured and becomes eligible for classification as  'standard asset' in terms of paras (iii) to (iv) below.
(ii)  A  loan for a non-infrastructure project will be classified as NPA if it fails to  commence commercial operations within one year from the original DCCO, even if  is regular as per record of recovery, unless it is restructured and becomes  eligible for classification as 'standard asset' in terms of paras (iii) to (iv)  below.
(iii)    In case of non-infrastructure projects, if the delay in commencement of  commercial operations extends beyond the period of one year from the date of  completion as determined at the time of financial closure, banks can prescribe  a fresh DCCO, and retain the "standard" classification by undertaking
restructuring of accounts
in accordance with the provisions contained in  this Master Circular, provided the fresh DCCO does not extend beyond a period  of two years from the original DCCO. This would among others also imply that  the restructuring application is received before the expiry of one year from  the original DCCO, and when the account is still "standard" as per  the record of recovery.
The other conditions applicable would be:
a.  In cases where  there is moratorium for payment of interest, banks should not book income on  accrual basis beyond one year from the original DCCO, considering the high risk  involved in such restructured accounts.
b.  Banks should maintain following provisions  on such accounts as long as these are classified as standard assets apart from  provision for diminution in fair value due to extension of DCCO:
Particulars
Provisioning Requirement
If the revised DCCO is within one year from the original DCCO    prescribed at the time of financial closure
0.40 per cent
If the DCCO is extended beyond one year and upto two years from    the original DCCO prescribed at the time of financial closure
Project loans    restructured with effect from June 1, 2013:
5.00 per cent –    From the date of restructuring for 2 years
Stock of Project    loans classified as restructured before June 01, 2013:
* 3.50 per cent - with effect from March 31, 2014 (spread over the    four quarters of 2013-14)
* 4.25 per cent - with effect from March 31, 2015 (spread over the    four quarters of 2014-15)
* 5.00 per cent -  with effect    from March 31, 2016 (spread over the four quarters of 2015-16)
The above provisions will be applicable    from the date of restructuring for 2    years.
(iv) For  the purpose of these guidelines, mere extension of DCCO would not be considered  as restructuring, if the revised DCCO falls within the period of one year from  the original DCCO. In such cases the consequential shift in repayment period by  equal or shorter duration (including the start date and end date of revised  repayment schedule) than the extension of DCCO would also not be considered as  restructuring provided all other terms and conditions of the loan remain  unchanged. As such project loans will be treated as standard assets in all  respects, they will attract standard asset provision of 0.40 per cent.
4.2.15.5
Other  Issues
(i) All  other aspects of restructuring of project loans before commencement of  commercial operations would be governed by the provisions of Part B of this  Master Circular on Prudential norms on Income Recognition, Asset Classification  and Provisioning Pertaining to Advances. Restructuring of project loans after  commencement of commercial operations will also be governed by these  instructions.
(ii)   Any change in the repayment schedule of a project loan caused due to an  increase in the project outlay on account of increase in scope and size of the  project, would not be treated as restructuring if:
(a)  The increase in  scope and size of the project takes place before commencement of commercial  operations of the existing project.
(b)  The rise in  cost excluding any cost-overrun in respect of the original project is 25% or  more of the original outlay.
(c)  The bank  re-assesses the viability of the project before approving the enhancement of  scope and fixing a fresh DCCO.
(d)  On re-rating, (if already rated)  the new rating is not below the previous rating by more than one notch.
(iii) Project Loans for Commercial  Real Estate
It has been represented that commercial real estate  (CRE) projects also face problems of delays in achieving the DCCO for  extraneous reasons. Therefore, it has been decided that for CRE projects mere  extension of DCCO would not be considered as restructuring, if the revised DCCO  falls within the period of one year from the original DCCO and there is no  change in other terms and conditions except possible shift of the repayment  schedule and servicing of the loan by equal or shorter duration compared to the  period by which DCCO has been extended. Such CRE project loans will be treated  as standard assets in all respects for this purpose without attracting the higher  provisioning applicable for restructured standard assets. However, as stated in  paragraph 15.1 of this circular, the asset classification benefit would not be  available to CRE projects if they are restructured.
(iv)  Multiple  revisions of the DCCO and consequential  shift in repayment schedule for equal or shorter duration (including the start  date and end date of revised repayment schedule)
will be treated as a single event of restructuring
provided that the revised DCCO is fixed within the respective time  limits stipulated at paragraphs 4.2.15.3 (iii) and 4.2.15.4 (iii) above, and  all other terms and conditions of the loan remained unchanged.
(v)  Banks, if deemed fit, may extend DCCO beyond  the respective time limits stipulated at paragraphs 4.2.15.3 (iii) and 4.2.15.4  (iii) above; however, in that case, banks will not be able to retain the  ‘standard’ asset classification status of such loan accounts.
(vi) In all the above cases of restructuring  where regulatory forbearance has been extended, the Boards of banks should  satisfy themselves about the viability of the project and the restructuring  plan.
4.2.15.6
Income  recognition
(i) Banks may recognise  income on accrual basis in respect of the projects under implementation,  which are classified as ‘standard’.
(ii)  Banks should  not recognise income on accrual basis in respect of the  projects under implementation which are classified as a ‘substandard’  asset. Banks may recognise income in such accounts only on  realisation on cash basis.
Consequently, banks which have  wrongly recognised income in the past should reverse the interest if it  was recognised as income during the current year or make a provision  for an equivalent amount if it was recognised as income in the previous  year(s). As regards the regulatory treatment of ‘funded  interest’ recognised as income and ‘conversion into equity, debentures or  any other instrument’ banks should adopt the following:
a)
Funded  Interest
: Income recognition in respect of the NPAs, regardless of  whether these are or are not subjected to restructuring/ rescheduling/  renegotiation of terms of the loan agreement, should be done strictly on  cash basis, only on realisation and not if the amount of interest overdue  has been funded. If, however, the amount of funded interest  is recognised as income, a provision for an equal amount should also  be made simultaneously. In other words, any funding of interest in respect  of NPAs, if recognised as income, should be fully provided for.
b)
Conversion  into equity, debentures or any other instrument
: The amount  outstanding converted into other instruments would normally comprise  principal and the interest components. If the amount of interest  dues is converted into equity or any other instrument, and  income is recognised in consequence, full provision should be made for the  amount of income so recognised to offset the effect of such income recognition.  Such provision would be in addition to the amount of provision that may be  necessary for the depreciation in the value of the equity or other  instruments, as per the investment valuation norms. However, if the  conversion of interest is into equity which is quoted, interest  income can be recognised at market value of equity, as on the date of  conversion, not exceeding the amount of interest converted to equity. Such  equity must thereafter be classified in the “available for sale”  category and valued at lower of cost or market value. In case of  conversion of principal and /or interest in respect of NPAs into  debentures, such debentures should be treated as NPA, ab initio, in  the same asset classification as was applicable to loan just before  conversion and provision made as per norms. This norm would also  apply to zero coupon bonds or other instruments which  seek to defer the liability of the issuer. On such debentures, income  should be recognised only on realisation basis. The income in respect of  unrealised interest which is converted into debentures or  any other fixed maturity instrument should be recognised only on  redemption of such instrument. Subject to the above, the  equity shares or other instruments arising from conversion of  the principal amount of loan would also be subject to the usual prudential  valuation norms as applicable to such instruments.
4.2.16
Take­out Finance
Takeout finance is the product emerging in  the context of the funding of long­-term infrastructure projects. Under  this arrangement, the institution/the bank financing infrastructure  projects will have an arrangement with any financial institution for transferring  to the latter the outstanding in respect of such financing in their  books on a pre­determined basis. In view of the time­-lag involved in  taking-­over, the possibility of a default in the meantime cannot be ruled out.  The norms of asset classification will have to be followed by the  concerned bank/financial institution in whose books the account  stands as balance sheet item as on the relevant date. If the  lending institution observes that the asset has turned NPA on the  basis of the record of recovery, it should be classified accordingly. The  lending institution should not recognise income on accrual basis and  account for the same only when it is paid by the borrower/ taking  over institution (if the arrangement so provides). However, the taking over institution,  on taking over such assets, should make provisions treating the account  as NPA from the actual date of it becoming NPA even though the account  was not in its books as on that date.
4.2.17
Post­-shipment  Supplier's Credit
In  respect of post­-shipment credit extended by the banks covering  export of goods to countries for which the Export Credit Guarantee Corporation’s  (ECGC) cover is available, EXIM Bank has introduced a guarantee­-cum-­refinance  programme whereby, in the event of default, EXIM Bank will pay the  guaranteed amount to the bank within a period of 30 days from the  day the bank invokes the guarantee after the exporter  has filed claim with ECGC.
Accordingly, to the extent payment has been  received from the EXIM Bank, the advance may not be treated as a non­performing  asset for asset classification and provisioning purposes.
4.2.18
Export  Project Finance
In respect of export project finance, there could be  instances where the actual importer has paid the dues to the  bank abroad but the bank in turn is unable to remit the amount due to  political developments such as war, strife, UN embargo, etc.
In such cases, where the lending  bank is able to establish through documentary evidence that the  importer has cleared the dues in full by depositing the amount  in the bank abroad before it turned into NPA in the books of the  bank, but the importer's country is not allowing the funds to be  remitted due to political or other reasons, the asset classification may be  made after a period of one year from the date the amount was deposited  by the importer in the bank abroad.
4.2.19
Advances under  rehabilitation approved by Board for Industrial and Financial  Reconstruction (BIFR)/Term Lending Institutions (TLIs)
Banks are not permitted to upgrade the  classification of any advance in respect of which the terms have been  re­negotiated unless the package of re­negotiated terms has worked  satisfactorily for a period of one year. While the existing credit  facilities sanctioned to a unit under rehabilitation packages approved  by BIFR/TLIs will continue to be classified as sub­standard or  doubtful as the case may be, in respect of additional  facilities sanctioned under the rehabilitation packages, the Income  Recognition, Asset Classification norms will become applicable after a  period of one year from the date of disbursement.
4.2.20
Transactions  Involving Transfer of Assets through Direct Assignment of Cash Flows and the  Underlying Securities
i) Originating Bank
: The asset classification and provisioning rules in  respect of the exposure representing the Minimum Retention Requirement (MRR) of  the Originator of the asset would be as under:
a) The  originating bank may maintain a consolidated account of the amount representing  MRR if the loans transferred are retail loans. In such a case, the consolidated  amount receivable in amortisation of the MRR and its periodicity should be  clearly established and the overdue status of the MRR should be determined with  reference to repayment of such amount.   Alternatively, the originating bank may continue to maintain  borrower-wise accounts for the proportionate amounts retained in respect of  those accounts.  In such a case, the  overdue status of the individual loan accounts should be determined with  reference to repayment received in each account.
b) In  the case of transfer of a pool of loans other than retail loans, the originator  should maintain borrower-wise accounts for the proportionate amounts retained  in respect of each loan. In such a  case, the overdue status of the individual loan accounts should be determined  with reference to repayment received in each account.
c) If the originating bank acts as a servicing agent  of the assignee bank for the loans transferred, it would know the overdue  status of loans transferred which should form the basis of classification of  the entire MRR/individual loans representing MRR as NPA in the books of the  originating bank, depending upon the method of accounting followed as explained  in para (a) and (b) above.
ii) Purchasing Bank
: In purchase of pools of both retail and non-retail  loans, income recognition, asset  classification and provisioning norms for the purchasing bank will be  applicable based on individual obligors and not based on portfolio. Banks should not apply the asset  classification, income recognition and provisioning norms at portfolio level,  as such treatment is likely to weaken the credit supervision due to its  inability to detect and address weaknesses in individual accounts in a timely  manner. If the purchasing bank is not maintaining the individual  obligor-wise accounts for the portfolio of loans purchased, it should have an  alternative mechanism to ensure application of prudential norms on individual  obligor basis, especially the classification of   the  amounts corresponding to the  obligors which need to be treated as NPAs as per existing prudential norms. One  such mechanism could be to seek monthly statements containing account-wise  details from the servicing agent to facilitate classification of the portfolio  into different asset classification categories. Such details should be  certified by the authorized officials of the servicing agent. Bank’s concurrent  auditors, internal auditors and statutory auditors should also conduct checks  of these portfolios with reference to the basic records maintained by the  servicing agent. The servicing agreement should provide for such verifications  by the auditors of the purchasing bank. All relevant information and audit  reports should be available for verification by the Inspecting Officials of RBI  during the Annual Financial Inspections of the purchasing banks.
iii) The guidelines prescribed above at 4.2.20 (i)  & (ii) do not apply to
(a) Transfer of loan  accounts of borrowers by a bank to other bank/FIs/NBFCs and vice versa, at the  request/instance of borrower;
(b) Inter-bank  participations;
(c) Trading in bonds;
(d) Sale of entire  portfolio of assets consequent upon a decision to exit the line of business  completely. Such a decision should have the approval of Board of Directors of  the bank;
(e) Consortium and  syndication arrangements and arrangement under Corporate Debt Restructuring  mechanism;
(f) Any other  arrangement/transactions, specifically exempted by the Reserve Bank of India.
4.2.21
Credit Card Accounts
(i) In credit card  accounts, the amount spent is billed to the card users through a monthly  statement with a definite due date for repayment. Banks give an option to the  card users to pay either the full amount or a fraction of it, i.e., minimum  amount due, on the due date and roll-over the balance amount to the subsequent  months’ billing cycle.
(ii) A credit card account will be treated as non-performing asset if  the minimum amount due, as mentioned in the statement, is not paid fully within  90 days from the next statement date. The gap between two statements should not  be more than a month.
(iii)  Banks should follow this uniform method of determining over-due status for  credit card accounts while reporting to credit information companies and for  the purpose of levying of penal charges, viz. late payment charges, etc.,  if any.
5
PROVISIONING  NORMS
5.1   General
5.1.1  The  primary responsibility for making adequate provisions for  any diminution in the value of loan assets, investment or other assets is that  of the bank managements and the statutory auditors. The assessment made by  the inspecting officer of the RBI is furnished to the bank to assist  the bank management and the statutory auditors in taking a  decision in regard to making adequate and necessary provisions in  terms of prudential guidelines.
5.1.2  In  conformity with the prudential norms, provisions should be made on the non­performing  assets on the basis of classification of assets into prescribed  categories as detailed in paragraphs 4 supra. Taking into  account the time lag between an account becoming doubtful of recovery, its recognition as such, the realisation of the security and the erosion over time in the value of security charged to the bank, the banks should make provision against sub­standard assets, doubtful assets and loss assets as below:
5.2   Loss assets
Loss assets should be written off. If loss assets are permitted to remain in the books for any reason, 100 percent of the outstanding should be provided for.
5.3   Doubtful assets
100 percent of the extent to which the  advance is not covered by the realisable value of the  security to which the bank has a valid recourse and the  realisable value is estimated on a realistic basis.
In regard to the secured portion,  provision may be made on the following basis, at the rates ranging  from 25 percent to 100 percent of the secured portion depending upon the period  for which the asset has remained doubtful:
Period for which the advance has
remained in ‘doubtful’ category
Provision requirement (%)
Up    to one year
25
One    to three years
40
More    than three years
100
Note:
Valuation  of Security for provisioning purposes
With a view to bringing down divergence arising  out of difference in assessment of the value of security, in cases of  NPAs with balance of Rs. 5 crore and above stock audit at annual  intervals by external agencies appointed as per the  guidelines approved by the Board would be mandatory in order to  enhance the reliability on stock valuation. Collaterals such  as immovable properties charged in favour of the bank should be  got valued once in three years by valuers appointed as per  the guidelines approved by the Board of Directors.
5.4   Sub­standard assets
(i) A  general provision of 15 percent on total outstanding should be made without  making any allowance for ECGC guarantee cover and
securities available
.
(ii)  The  ‘unsecured exposures’ which are identified as ‘substandard’ would attract  additional provision of 10 per cent, i.e., a total of 25 per cent on the outstanding  balance. However, in view of certain safeguards such as escrow accounts  available in respect of infrastructure lending, infrastructure loan accounts  which are classified as sub-standard will attract a provisioning of 20 per cent  instead of the aforesaid prescription of 25 per cent. To avail of this benefit  of lower provisioning, the banks should have in place an appropriate mechanism  to escrow the cash flows and also have a clear and legal first claim on these  cash flows. The provisioning requirement for unsecured ‘doubtful’  assets is 100 per cent. Unsecured exposure is defined as an  exposure where the realisable value of the security, as assessed  by the bank/approved valuers/Reserve Bank’s inspecting officers, is not  more than 10 percent,
ab-­initio
, of  the outstanding exposure. ‘Exposure’ shall include all funded and non-­funded  exposures (including underwriting and similar commitments). ‘Security’  will mean tangible security properly discharged to the bank and  will not include intangible securities like guarantees (including State  government guarantees), comfort letters etc.
(iii) In  order to enhance transparency and ensure correct reflection of the unsecured  advances in Schedule 9 of the banks' balance sheet, it is advised that the  following would be applicable from the financial year 2009-10 onwards:
a)   For determining the amount of unsecured advances for reflecting in schedule 9  of the published balance sheet, the rights, licenses, authorisations, etc.,  charged to the banks as collateral in respect of projects (including  infrastructure projects) financed by them, should not be reckoned as tangible  security. Hence such advances shall be reckoned as unsecured.
b)  However, banks may treat annuities under build-operate-transfer (BOT) model in  respect of road / highway projects and toll collection rights, where there are  provisions to compensate the project sponsor if a certain level of traffic is  not achieved, as tangible securities subject to the condition that banks' right  to receive annuities and toll collection rights is legally enforceable and  irrevocable.
c) It is noticed that most of the infrastructure  projects, especially road/highway projects are user-charge based, for which the  Planning Commission has published Model Concession Agreements (MCAs). These have  been adopted by various Ministries and State Governments for their respective  public-private partnership (PPP) projects and they provide adequate comfort to  the lenders regarding security of their debt. In view of the above features, in  case of PPP projects, the debts due to the lenders may be considered as secured  to the extent assured by the project authority in terms of the Concession  Agreement, subject to the following conditions:
i)  User charges / toll / tariff payments are kept in an escrow account where  senior lenders have priority over withdrawals by the concessionaire;
ii)  There is sufficient risk mitigation, such as pre-determined increase in user  charges or increase in concession period, in case project revenues are lower  than anticipated;
iii)  The lenders have a right of substitution in case of concessionaire default;
iv)  The lenders have a right to trigger termination in case of default in debt  service; and
v) Upon termination, the Project Authority has an  obligation of (i) compulsory buy-out and (ii) repayment of debt due in a  pre-determined manner.
In all such cases, banks must satisfy themselves  about the legal enforceability of the provisions of the tripartite agreement  and factor in their past experience with such contracts.
d)  Banks should also disclose  the total amount of advances for which intangible securities such as charge  over the rights, licenses, authority, etc. has been taken as also the estimated  value of such intangible collateral. The disclosure may be made under a  separate head in "Notes to Accounts". This would differentiate such  loans from other entirely unsecured loans.
5.5   Standard assets
(i)   The  provisioning requirements for all types of standard assets stands as below.  Banks should make general provision for standard assets at the  following rates for the funded outstanding on global loan portfolio basis:
(a)  direct  advances to agricultural and Small and Micro Enterprises (SMEs) sectors at  0.25 per cent;
(b)  advances to Commercial Real Estate (CRE)  Sector at 1.00 per cent;
(c)  advances to Commercial Real Estate –  Residential Housing Sector (CRE - RH) at 0.75 per cent
1
(d)  housing  loans extended at teaser rates and restructured advances as as  indicated in Para 5.9.13 and 12.4 respectively;
(e)  all  other loans and advances  not included in  (a)  (b) and (c) above at 0.40 per cent.
(ii)  The  provisions on standard assets should not be reckoned for arriving at  net NPAs.
(iii) The  provisions towards Standard Assets need not be netted from gross advances  but shown separately as 'Contingent Provisions against Standard  Assets' under 'Other Liabilities and Provisions ­Others' in Schedule  5 of the balance sheet.
(iv)   It is clarified that the Medium Enterprises will attract 0.40%  standard asset provisioning. The definition of the terms Micro Enterprises,  Small Enterprises, and Medium Enterprises shall be in terms of Master Circular RPCD.SME&NFS.BC.No. 5/06.02.31/2013-14 dated July 1, 2013 on Lending to  Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (MSME) Sector.
(v)  While the  provisions on individual portfolios are required to be calculated at the rates  applicable to them, the excess or shortfall in the provisioning, vis-a-vis the  position as on any previous date, should be determined on an aggregate basis.  If the provisions required to be held on an aggregate basis are less than the  provisions held as on November 15, 2008, the provisions rendered surplus should  not be reversed to Profit and Loss account; but should continue to be  maintained at the level existed as on November 15, 2008. In case of shortfall  determined on aggregate basis, the balance should be provided for by debit to  Profit and Loss account.
(vi) A high level of unhedged foreign currency  exposures of the entities can increase the probability of default in times of  high currency volatility. Hence, banks are required to estimate the riskiness of unhedged position of their  borrowers as per the instructions contained in our circular  DBOD.No.BP.BC.85/21.06.200/2013-14 dated January 15, 2014 as well as our  circular DBOD.No.BP.BC.116/21.06.200/2013-14 dated June  3, 2014 and make incremental provisions on their exposures  to such entities:
Likely Loss / EBID (%)
Incremental Provisioning Requirement on the total    credit exposures over and above extant standard asset provisioning
Upto 15 per cent
0
More than 15 per cent and upto 30 per cent
20bps
More than 30 per cent and upto 50 per cent
40bps
More than 50 per cent and upto 75 per cent
60bps
More than 75 per cent
80 bps
5.6   Prudential norms on creation and  utilisation of floating provisions
5.6.1
Principle  for creation of floating provisions by banks
The bank's board of directors should  lay down approved policy regarding the level to which the floating  provisions can be created. The bank should hold floating  provisions for ‘advances’ and ‘investments’ separately and the  guidelines prescribed will be applicable to floating provisions held for  both ‘advances’ & ‘investment’ portfolios.
5.6.2
Principle  for utilisation of floating provisions by banks
The floating provisions should not be used for making  specific provisions as per the extant prudential  guidelines in respect of non­performing assets or for making  regulatory provisions for standard assets. The floating  provisions can be used only for contingencies under  extraordinary circumstances for making specific provisions in impaired  accounts after obtaining board’s approval and with prior permission of RBI. The Boards of the  banks should lay down an approved policy as to what  circumstances would be considered extraordinary.
To facilitate banks' Boards to evolve suitable  policies in this regard, it is clarified that the extra-ordinary circumstances  refer to losses which do not arise in the normal course of business and are  exceptional and non-recurring in nature. These extra-ordinary circumstances  could broadly fall under three categories viz. General, Market and Credit.  Under general category, there can be situations where bank is put unexpectedly  to loss due to events such as civil unrest or collapse of currency in a  country. Natural calamities and pandemics may also be included in the general  category. Market category would include events such as a general melt down in  the markets, which affects the entire financial system. Among the credit  category, only exceptional credit losses would be considered as an  extra-ordinary circumstance.
5.6.3
Accounting
Floating provisions cannot be reversed by credit  to the profit and loss account. They can only be utilised for making specific  provisions in extraordinary circumstances as mentioned above. Until such  utilisation, these provisions can be netted off from gross NPAs to arrive at  disclosure of net NPAs. Alternatively, they can be treated as part of Tier II  capital within the overall ceiling of 1.25 % of total risk weighted assets.
5.6.4
Disclosures
Banks should make comprehensive  disclosures on floating provisions in the “notes on accounts” to the  balance sheet on (a) opening balance in the floating provisions account, (b)  the quantum of floating provisions made in the accounting year, (c)  purpose and amount of draw down made during the accounting year, and (d)  closing balance in the floating provisions account.
5.7   Additional Provisions for NPAs at  higher than prescribed rates
The regulatory norms for provisioning represent  the minimum requirement.  A  bank may voluntarily make specific provisions for  advances at rates which are higher than the rates prescribed  under existing regulations, to provide for estimated actual loss in  collectible amount, provided such higher rates are approved by the  Board of Directors and consistently adopted from year to year. Such  additional provisions are not to be considered as floating  provisions. The additional provisions for NPAs, like the minimum regulatory provision  on NPAs, may be netted off from gross NPAs to arrive at the net NPAs
5.8   Provisions on Leased Assets
i)
Sub­standard  assets
a)   15 percent of the sum of the net  investment in the lease and the unrealised portion of finance income net of  finance charge component. The terms ‘net investment in the lease’,  ‘finance income’ and ‘finance charge’ are as defined in ‘AS 19 ­Leases’ issued  by the ICAI.
b)   Unsecured  (as defined in paragraph 5.4 above) lease exposures,, which are identified  as ‘substandard’ would attract additional provision of 10 per cent, i.e.,  a total of 25 per cent.
ii)
Doubtful  assets
100 percent of the extent to which the finance  is not secured by the realisable value of the leased asset, should be  provided for. Realisable value is to be estimated on a realistic basis. In  addition to the above provision, provision at the following rates should  be made on the sum of the net investment in the lease and the unrealised  portion of finance income net of finance charge component of the secured  portion, depending upon the period for which asset has been doubtful:
Period for which the advance has
remained in ‘doubtful’ category
Provision requirement (%)
Up    to one year
25
One    to three years
40
More    than three years
100
iii)
Loss assets
The entire asset should be written off. If for  any reason, an asset is allowed to remain in books, 100 percent of the sum  of the net investment in the lease and the unrealised portion of finance income  net of finance charge component should be provided for.
5.9   Guidelines for Provisions under  Special Circumstances
5.9.1  Advances granted  under rehabilitation packages approved by BIFR/term lending  institutions
(i)   In respect of advances under  rehabilitation package approved by BIFR/term lending institutions, the  provision should continue to be made in respect of dues to the  bank on the existing credit facilities as per their  classification as sub­standard or doubtful asset.
(ii)   As regards the additional  facilities sanctioned as per package finalised by BIFR and/or term  lending institutions, provision on additional facilities sanctioned need  not be made for a period of one year from the date of disbursement.
(iii)  In respect of additional credit  facilities granted to SSI units which are identified  as sick [as defined in Section IV (Para 4.7) of circular RPCD.SME&NFS.BC.No.5/06.02.31/2013-14  dated July 1, 2013] and where rehabilitation packages/nursing  programmes have been drawn by the banks themselves or under  consortium arrangements, no provision need be made for a period of one year.
5.9.2  Advances against  term deposits, NSCs eligible for surrender, IVPs, KVPs, gold ornaments,  government & other securities and life insurance policies would  attract provisioning requirements as applicable to their asset  classification status.
5.9.3
Treatment  of interest suspense account
Amounts held in Interest Suspense Account  should not be reckoned as part of provisions. Amounts lying in the  Interest Suspense Account should be deducted from the relative  advances and thereafter, provisioning as per the norms, should be  made on the balances after such deduction.
5.9.4
Advances covered  by ECGC guarantee
In the case of advances classified  as doubtful and guaranteed by ECGC, provision should be made  only for the balance in excess of the amount guaranteed by the  Corporation. Further, while arriving at the provision required to be made for  doubtful assets, realisable value of the securities should first be  deducted from the outstanding balance in respect of the amount guaranteed  by the Corporation and then provision made as illustrated hereunder:
Example
Outstanding    Balance
Rs.    4 lakhs
ECGC    Cover
50    percent
Period    for which the advance has remained doubtful
More    than 2 years remained doubtful (say as on March 31, 2014)
Value    of security held
Rs.    1.50 lakhs
Provision required to be made
Outstanding balance
Rs. 4.00 lakhs
Less: Value of security    held
Rs. 1.50 lakhs
Unrealised balance
Rs. 2.50 lakhs
Less: ECGC Cover
(50% of unrealisable    balance)
Rs. 1.25 lakhs
Net unsecured balance
Rs. 1.25 lakhs
Provision for unsecured    portion of  advance
Rs. 1.25 lakhs
(@ 100    percent of unsecured portion)
Provision for secured    portion of advance
(as on March 31, 2012)
Rs.0.60 lakhs
(@ 40 per    cent of the secured portion)
Total provision to be made
Rs.1.85 lakhs
(as on March    31, 2014)
5.9.5
Advance  covered by guarantees of Credit  Guarantee Fund Trust For Micro And Small Enterprises (CGTMSE) or Credit  Risk Guarantee Fund Trust for Low Income Housing (CRGFTLIH)
In case the advance covered by CGTMSE or  CRGFTLIH guarantee becomes non­performing, no provision need be made  towards the guaranteed portion. The amount outstanding in excess of  the guaranteed portion should be provided for as per the extant guidelines  on provisioning for non­performing advances. An illustrative example is given  below:
Example
Outstanding    Balance
Rs.    10 lakhs
CGTMSE/CRGFTLIH    Cover
75%    of the amount outstanding or 75% of the unsecured amount or Rs.37.50 lakh,    whichever is the least
Period    for which the advance has remained doubtful
More    than 2 years remained doubtful (say as on March 31, 2014)
Value    of security held
Rs.    1.50 lakhs
Provision required to be made
Balance    outstanding
Rs.10.00 lakh
Less: Value    of security
Rs. 1.50 lakh
Unsecured    amount
Rs. 8.50 lakh
Less: CGTMSE/CRGFTLIH    cover (75%)
Rs. 6.38 lakh
Net    unsecured and uncovered portion:
Rs. 2.12 lakh
Provision    for Secured portion @ 40% of Rs.1.50 lakh
Rs.0.60 lakh
Provision    for Unsecured & uncovered portion @ 100% of Rs.2.12 lakh
Rs.2.12 lakh
Total    provision required
Rs.2.72    lakh
5.9.6
Take­out  finance
The lending institution should make  provisions against a 'take­out finance' turning into NPA pending  its take­over by the taking­-over institution. As and when the  asset is taken-­over by the taking­-over institution, the  corresponding provisions could be reversed.
5.9.7
Reserve  for Exchange Rate Fluctuations Account (RERFA)
When exchange rate movements of Indian  rupee turn adverse, the outstanding amount of foreign currency denominated  loans (where actual disbursement was made in Indian Rupee) which  becomes overdue, goes up correspondingly, with its attendant  implications of provisioning requirements. Such assets should not  normally be revalued. In case such assets need to be revalued as per  requirement of accounting practices or for any other requirement, the  following procedure may be adopted:
The  loss on revaluation of assets has to be booked in the bank's   Profit & Loss Account.
In addition to the provisioning requirement  as per Asset Classification, the full amount of the Revaluation Gain, if  any, on account of foreign exchange fluctuation should be used to make  provisions against the corresponding assets.
5.9.8
Provisioning  for country risk
Banks shall make provisions, with effect  from the year ending March 31, 2003, on the net funded  country exposures on a graded scale ranging from 0.25 to 100 percent  according to the risk categories mentioned below. To begin with,  banks shall make provisions as per the following schedule:
Risk category
ECGC Classification
Provisioning Requirement (per cent)
Insignificant
A1
0.25
Low
A2
0.25
Moderate
B1
5
High
B2
20
Very high
C1
25
Restricted
C2
100
Off­-credit
D
100
Banks are required to make provision for  country risk in respect of a country where its net funded  exposure is one per cent or more of its total assets.
The provision for country risk shall be in  addition to the provisions required to be held according to the asset  classification status of the asset. However, in the case of  ‘loss assets’ and ‘doubtful assets’, provision held, including provision  held for country risk, may not exceed 100% of the outstanding.
Banks may not make any provision  for ‘home country’ exposures i.e. exposure to India. The exposures of  foreign branches of Indian banks to the host country should be  included. Foreign banks shall compute the country exposures of  their Indian branches and shall hold appropriate provisions in their  Indian books. However, their exposures to India will be excluded.
Banks may make a lower level of  provisioning (say 25% of the requirement) in respect of short­-term  exposures (i.e. exposures with contractual maturity of  less than 180 days).
5.9.9
Excess Provisions on sale of  Standard Asset / NPAs
(a)   If the sale is in respect of Standard Asset and the sale consideration  is higher than the book value, the excess provisions may be credited to Profit  and Loss Account.
(b)  Excess  provisions which arise on sale of NPAs can be admitted as Tier II capital  subject to the overall ceiling of 1.25% of total Risk Weighted Assets.  Accordingly, these excess provisions that arise on sale of NPAs would be  eligible for Tier II status in terms of paragraph 4.3.2 of Master Circular DBOD.No.BP.BC.9/21.06.001/2013-14  dated July 01, 2013 on Prudential guidelines on Capital Adequacy and Market  Discipline - New Capital Adequacy Framework (NCAF).
5.9.10
Provisions  for Diminution of Fair Value
Provisions for diminution of fair value of  restructured advances, both in respect of Standard Assets as well as NPAs, made  on account of reduction in rate of interest and / or reschedulement of  principal amount are permitted to be netted from the relative asset.
5.9.11
Provisioning  norms for Liquidity facility provided for Securitisation transactions
The amount of liquidity facility drawn and  outstanding for more than 90 days, in respect of securitisation transactions  undertaken in terms of our guidelines on securitisation dated February 1, 2006,  should be fully provided for.
5.9.12
Provisioning requirements for derivative  exposures
Credit exposures computed as per the current  marked to market value of the contract, arising on account of the interest rate  & foreign exchange derivative transactions, credit default swaps and gold,  shall also attract provisioning requirement as applicable to the loan assets in  the 'standard' category, of the concerned counterparties. All conditions  applicable for treatment of the provisions for standard assets would also apply  to the aforesaid provisions for derivative and gold exposures.
5.9.13
Provisioning for housing loans at  teaser rates
It has been observed that some banks are  following the practice of sanctioning housing loans at teaser rates i.e. at  comparatively lower rates of interest in the first few years, after which rates  are reset at higher rates. This practice raises concern as some borrowers may  find it difficult to service the loans once the normal interest rate, which is  higher than the rate applicable in the initial years, becomes effective. It has  been also observed that many banks at the time of initial loan appraisal, do  not take into account the repaying capacity of the borrower at normal lending  rates. Therefore, the standard asset provisioning on the outstanding amount of  such loans has been increased from 0.40 per cent to 2.00 per cent in view of  the higher risk associated with them. The provisioning on these assets would  revert to 0.40 per cent after 1 year from the date on which the rates are reset  at higher rates if the accounts remain ‘standard’.
5.10
Provisioning Coverage Ratio
i. Provisioning Coverage Ratio (PCR) is  essentially the ratio of provisioning to gross non-performing assets and  indicates the extent of funds a bank has kept aside to cover loan losses.
ii. From a macro-prudential perspective, banks  should build up provisioning and capital buffers in good times i.e. when the  profits are good, which can be used for absorbing losses in a downturn. This  will enhance the soundness of individual banks, as also the stability of the  financial sector. It was, therefore, decided that banks should augment their  provisioning cushions consisting of specific provisions against NPAs as well as  floating provisions, and ensure that their total provisioning coverage ratio,  including floating provisions, is not less than 70 per cent. Accordingly, banks  were advised to achieve this norm not later than end-September 2010.
iii. Majority of the banks had achieved PCR of 70 percent  and had represented to RBI whether the prescribed PCR is required to be  maintained on an ongoing basis. The matter was examined and till such time RBI  introduces a more comprehensive methodology of countercyclical provisioning  taking into account the international standards as are being currently  developed by Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) and other  provisioning norms, banks were advised that:
a) the PCR of 70  percent may be with reference to the gross NPA position in banks as on  September 30, 2010;
b) the surplus of the  provision under PCR vis-a-vis as required as per prudential norms should be  segregated into an account styled as “countercyclical provisioning buffer”,  computation of which may be undertaken as per the format given in Annex - 3;  and
c) this buffer will be allowed to be used by banks for  making specific provisions for NPAs during periods of system wide downturn,  with the prior approval of RBI
2
.
iv. The PCR of the bank should be disclosed in the  Notes to Accounts to the Balance Sheet.
v. In terms of the Discussion Paper on Introduction  of Dynamic Loan Loss Provisioning Framework for Banks in India dated March 30,  2012, banks are required to build up ‘Dynamic Provisioning Account’ during good  times and utilise the same during downturn. Under the proposed framework, banks  are expected to either compute parameters such as probability of default, loss  given default, etc. for different asset classes to arrive at long term average  annual expected loss or use the standardised parameters prescribed by Reserve  Bank of India towards computation of Dynamic Provisioning requirement. Dynamic  loan loss provisioning framework is expected to be in place with improvement in  the system. Meanwhile, banks should develop necessary capabilities to compute  their long term average annual expected loss for different asset classes, for  switching over to the dynamic provisioning framework.
6. Guidelines  on sale of financial assets to Securitisation Company (SC)/  Reconstruction Company (RC) (created  under the Securitisation and   Reconstruction  of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act,   2002) and related issues
6.1 Scope
These guidelines would be applicable to sale of  financial assets enumerated in paragraph 6.3 below, by banks/ FIs, for asset  reconstruction/ securitisation under the Securitisation and Reconstruction of  Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002.
6.2 Structure
The guidelines to be followed by banks/ FIs  while selling their financial assets to SC/RC under the Act ibid and investing  in bonds/ debentures/ security receipts offered by the SC/RC are given below.  The prudential guidelines have been grouped under the following headings:
i)  Financial  assets which can be sold.
ii)    Procedure for sale of banks’/ FIs’  financial assets to SC/ RC, including  valuation and pricing aspects.
iii)   Prudential norms, in the following  areas, for banks/ FIs for sale of their  financial assets to SC/ RC and for investing in bonds/debentures/security receipts and any other securities offered by the SC/RC as compensation consequent upon sale  of financial assets:
a)   Provisioning  / Valuation norms
b)    Capital adequacy norms
c)    Exposure norms
iv)  Disclosure  requirements
6.3   Financial  assets which can be sold
A financial asset may be sold to the SC/RC by  any bank/ FI where the asset is:
i)  A NPA, including a non-performing bond/  debenture.
ii)   A Standard Asset where:
(a)  the  asset is under consortium/ multiple banking arrangements,
(b)   at least 75% by value of the asset  is classified as non-performing  asset in the books of other banks/FIs, and
(c)   at least 75% (by value) of the  banks / FIs who are under the consortium  / multiple banking arrangements agree to the sale of the asset to SC/RC.
and
iii)   An  asset reported as SMA-2 by the bank / FI to Central Repository for Information on  Large Credit (CRILC) in terms of DBOD.BP.BC.No.98/21.04.132/2013-14 February  26, 2014
6.4. Procedure  for sale of banks’/ FIs’ financial assets to SC/ RC, including valuation  and pricing aspects
(a)  The Securitisation and Reconstruction of  Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (SARFAESI Act)  allows acquisition of financial assets by SC/RC from any bank/ FI on such terms  and conditions as may be agreed upon between them. This provides for sale of  the financial assets on ‘without recourse’ basis, i.e., with the entire credit  risk associated with the financial assets being transferred to SC/ RC, as well  as on ‘with recourse’ basis, i.e., subject to unrealized part of the asset  reverting to the seller bank/ FI. Banks/ FIs are, however, directed to ensure  that the effect of the sale of the financial assets should be such that the  asset is taken off the books of the bank/ FI and after the sale there should  not be any known liability devolving on the banks/ FIs.
(b)  Banks/  FIs, which propose to sell to SC/RC their financial assets should ensure that  the sale is conducted in a prudent manner in accordance with a policy approved  by the Board. The Board shall lay down policies and guidelines covering, inter  alia,
Financial  assets to be sold;
Norms  and procedure for sale of such financial assets;
Valuation  procedure to be followed to ensure that the realisable value of financial  assets is reasonably estimated;
Delegation of powers of various functionaries for  taking decision on the sale of the financial assets; etc.
(c)  Banks/  FIs should ensure that subsequent to sale of the financial assets to SC/RC,  they do not assume any operational, legal or any other type of risks relating  to the financial assets sold.
(d) (i)  Each  bank / FI will make its own assessment of the value offered by the SC / RC for the  financial asset and decide whether to accept or reject the offer.
(ii)   In the case of  consortium / multiple banking arrangements, if 75% (by value) of the banks / FIs decide to accept the offer,  the remaining banks / FIs  will be obligated to accept the offer.
(iii)  Under  no circumstances can a transfer to the SC/ RC be made at a contingent price whereby in the  event of shortfall in the realization by the SC/RC, the banks/ FIs  would have to bear a part of the shortfall.
(iv)   Banks using auction process for sale of  NPAs to SCs / RCs should be more transparent, including disclosure of the  Reserve Price, specifying clauses for non-acceptance of bids, etc. If a bid  received is above the Reserve Price and a minimum of 50 per cent of sale  proceeds is in cash, and also fulfills the other conditions specified in the  Offer Document, acceptance of that bid would be mandatory.
(e)  Banks/  FIs may receive cash or bonds or debentures as sale consideration for the  financial assets sold to SC/RC.
(f)  Bonds/  debentures received by banks/ FIs as sale consideration towards sale of  financial assets to SC/RC will be classified as investments in the books of  banks/ FIs.
(g)  Banks  may also invest in security receipts, Pass-through certificates (PTC), or other  bonds/ debentures issued by SC/RC. These securities will also be classified as  investments in the books of banks/ FIs.
(h)  In  cases of specific financial assets, where it is considered necessary, banks/  FIs may enter into agreement with SC/RC to share, in an agreed proportion, any  surplus realised by SC/RC on the eventual realisation of the concerned asset.  In such cases the terms of sale should provide for a report from the SC/RC to  the bank/ FI on the value realised from the asset. No credit for the expected  profit will be taken by banks/ FIs until the profit materializes on actual  sale.
6.5.  Prudential  norms for banks/ FIs for the sale transactions
(A)
Provisioning/  valuation norms
(a)   (i)   When a bank / FI sells its financial  assets to SC/ RC, on transfer the  same  will be removed from its books.
(ii)  If the sale to SC/ RC is at a price below  the net book value (NBV) (i.e., book value less provisions held), the shortfall  should be debited to the profit and loss account of that year. Banks can also use  countercyclical / floating provisions for meeting any shortfall on sale of NPAs  i.e., when the sale is at a price below the net book value (NBV).
However, for assets  sold on or after February 26, 2014 and upto March 31, 2015, as an incentive for  early sale of NPAs, banks can spread over any shortfall, if the sale value is  lower than the NBV, over a period of two years. This facility of spreading over  the shortfall will be subject to necessary disclosures in the Notes to Account  in Annual Financial Statements of the banks.
(iii)    For assets sold on or after February  26, 2014, banks can reverse the excess provision on sale of NPAs, if the sale  value is for a value higher than the NBV, to its profit and loss account in the  year the amounts are received. However, banks can reverse excess provision  arising out of sale of NPAs only when the cash received (by way of initial  consideration and / or redemption of SRs / PTCs) is higher than the net book value  (NBV) of the asset. Further, reversal of excess provision will be limited to  the extent to which cash received exceeds the NBV of the asset.
With regard to assets  sold before February 26, 2014, excess provision, on account of sale value being  higher than NBV, should not be reversed but should be utilized to meet the shortfall/  loss on account of sale of other financial assets to SC/RC.
(iv)   When banks/ FIs invest in the security  receipts/ pass-through certificates issued by  SC/RC in respect of the financial assets sold   by  them to the SC/RC, the sale shall be recognised in books of the   banks / FIs at the lower  of:
the redemption value  of the security receipts/ pass-through certificates, and
the NBV of the financial asset.
The above investment should be carried in the  books of the bank / FI at the price as determined above until its sale or  realization, and on such sale or realization, the loss or gain must be dealt  with in the same   manner as at (ii)  and (iii) above.
(b)  The securities (bonds and debentures)  offered by SC / RC should satisfy  the   following conditions:
(i) The securities must not have a term in  excess of six years.
(ii)  The  securities must carry a rate of interest which is not lower than  1.5% above the Bank  Rate in force at the time of issue.
(iii) The securities must be secured by an appropriate charge on the    assets  transferred.
(iv)   The securities must provide for part or full prepayment in the  event   the SC / RC  sells the asset securing the security before the maturity   date of the security.
(v). The  commitment of the SC / RC to redeem the securities must be    unconditional  and not linked to the realization of the assets.
(vi)   Whenever the security is transferred to  any other party, notice of    transfer should be issued to the SC/  RC.
(c)  Investment  in debentures/ bonds/ security receipts/ Pass-through  certificates issued by SC/ RC
All instruments received by banks/FIs from SC/RC as  sale consideration for financial assets sold to them and also other instruments  issued by SC/ RC in which banks/ FIs invest will be in the nature of non SLR  securities. Accordingly, the valuation, classification and other norms  applicable to investment in non-SLR instruments prescribed by RBI from time to  time would be applicable to bank’s/ FI’s investment in debentures/ bonds/  security receipts/PTCs issued by SC/ RC. However, if any of the above  instruments issued by SC/RC is limited to the actual realisation of the  financial assets assigned to the instruments in the concerned scheme the bank/  FI shall reckon the Net Asset Value (NAV), obtained from SC/RC from time to  time, for valuation of such investments.
(B)
Exposure  Norms
Banks’/ FIs’ investments in debentures/ bonds/  security receipts/PTCs issued by a SC/RC will constitute exposure on the SC/RC.  As only a few SC/RC are being set up now, banks’/ FIs’ exposure on SC/RC  through their investments in debentures/ bonds/security receipts/PTCs issued by  the SC/ RC may go beyond their prudential exposure ceiling. In view of the  extra ordinary nature of event, banks/ FIs will be allowed, in the initial  years, to exceed prudential exposure ceiling on a case-to-case basis.
6.6.  Disclosure  Requirements
Banks/ FIs, which sell their financial assets to  an SC/ RC, shall be required to make the following disclosures in the Notes on  Accounts to their Balance sheets:
Details of financial assets sold during the year  to SC/RC for Asset Reconstruction
No.  of accounts
Aggregate  value (net of provisions) of accounts sold to SC / RC
Aggregate  consideration
Additional  consideration realized in respect of accounts transferred in earlier years
Aggregate gain / loss over net book value.
6.7.  Related  Issues
(a)  SC/ RC will also take over financial  assets which cannot be revived and which,   therefore,  will have to be disposed of on a realisation basis. Normally the SC/ RC will  not take over these assets but act as an agent for recovery for which it will  charge a fee.
(b)  Where  the assets fall in the above category, the assets will not be removed  from the books of the bank/ FI but  realisations as and when received will be  credited  to the asset account. Provisioning for the asset will continue to be   made by the bank / FI in the normal  course.
7.
Guidelines  on purchase/ sale of Non - Performing Financial Assets (other than to SC/RC)
In order to increase the options available  to banks for resolving their non performing assets and to develop a  healthy secondary market for non­performing assets, where  securitisation companies and reconstruction companies are not  involved, guidelines have been issued to banks on purchase / sale of Non­ Performing  Assets. Since the sale/purchase of non­performing financial assets under  this option would be conducted within the financial system the whole  process of resolving the non performing assets and  matters related thereto has to be initiated with due diligence and  care warranting the existence of a set of clear guidelines which shall be  complied with by all entities so that the process of resolving  non­performing assets by sale and purchase of  NPAs proceeds on smooth and sound lines. Accordingly guidelines  on sale/purchase of non­performing assets have been formulated and  furnished below. The guidelines may be placed before the bank's /FI's /NBFC's Board  and appropriate steps may be taken for their implementation.
7.1 Scope
7.1 These guidelines would be applicable to banks,  FIs and NBFCs purchasing/ selling non performing financial assets,  from/ to other banks/FIs/NBFCs (excluding securitisation companies/  reconstruction companies).
A financial asset, including assets under  multiple/consortium banking arrangements, would be eligible for purchase/sale  in terms of these guidelines if it is a non­performing asset/non  performing investment in the books of the selling bank.
The reference to ‘bank’ in the  guidelines on purchase/sale of non­performing financial assets would  include financial institutions and NBFCs.
7.2 Structure
7.2   The  guidelines to be followed by banks purchasing/ selling non­performing  financial assets from / to other banks are given below. The  guidelines have been grouped under the following headings:
i)  Procedure for purchase/ sale of non  performing financial assets by banks, including  valuation and pricing aspects.
ii)   Prudential norms, in the following  areas, for banks for purchase/ sale of non performing financial  assets:
a)    Asset classification norms
b)   Provisioning  norms
c)   Accounting  of recoveries
d)   Capital  adequacy norms
e)   Exposure norms
iii)   Disclosure  requirements
7.3   Procedure for purchase/ sale of non  performing financial assets, including   valuation  and pricing aspects
i)  A  bank which is purchasing/ selling non­performing financial  assets should ensure that the purchase/ sale is conducted in  accordance with a policy approved by the Board. The Board shall  lay down policies and guidelines covering, inter alia,
a)   Non performing financial  assets that may be purchased/ sold;
b)   Norms and procedure for purchase/  sale of such financial assets;
c)   Valuation procedure to be followed to  ensure that the economic value of  financial assets is reasonably estimated based on the estimated  cash flows arising out of repayments and recovery  prospects;
d) Delegation of powers of  various functionaries for taking decision on the purchase/ sale of  the financial assets; etc.
e)   Accounting  policy
ii)   While  laying down the policy, the Board shall satisfy itself that the  bank has adequate skills to purchase non performing financial  assets and deal with them in an efficient manner which will result in  value addition to the bank. The Board should also ensure that appropriate  systems and procedures are in place to effectively address the  risks that a purchasing bank would assume while engaging in this  activity.
iii)   Banks  should, while selling NPAs, work out the net present value of the estimated  cash flows associated with the realisable value of the available securities net  of the cost of realisation. The sale price should generally not be lower than  the net present value arrived at in the manner described above. (same principle  should be used in compromise settlements. As the payment of the compromise  amount may be in instalments, the net present value of the settlement amount  should be calculated and this amount should generally not be less than the net  present value of the realisable value of securities.)
iv)  The  estimated cash flows are normally expected to be realised within a  period of three years and at least 10% of the estimated cash flows should be  realized in the first year and at least 5% in each half year thereafter,  subject to full recovery within three years.
v)   A  bank may purchase/sell non­performing financial assets from/to  other banks only on ‘without recourse’ basis, i.e., the entire credit  risk associated with the non­performing financial assets should be  transferred to the purchasing bank. Selling bank shall ensure that the  effect of the sale of the financial assets should be such that the asset  is taken off the books of the bank and after the sale there  should not be any known liability devolving on the selling bank.
vi)  Banks should  ensure that subsequent to sale of the non performing financial assets to  other banks, they do not have any involvement with reference to assets  sold and do not assume operational, legal or any other type of  risks relating to the financial assets sold. Consequently, the  specific financial asset should not enjoy the support of credit  enhancements / liquidity facilities in any form or manner.
vii)   Each  bank will make its own assessment of the value offered by the  purchasing bank for the financial asset and decide whether to accept or  reject the offer.
viii)   Under  no circumstances can a sale to other banks be made at a contingent  price whereby in the event of shortfall in the realization by the  purchasing banks, the selling banks would have to bear a part of the  shortfall.
ix)  Banks shall  sell non­performing financial assets to other banks only on cash  basis. The entire sale consideration should be received upfront and the asset  can be taken out of the books of the selling bank only on  receipt of the entire sale consideration.
x)   A  non­performing financial asset should be held by the purchasing  bank in its books at least for a period of 12 months before it  is sold to other banks. Banks should not sell such  assets back to the bank, which had sold the NPFA.
(xi)   Banks are  also permitted to sell/buy homogeneous pool within retail non­performing  financial assets, on a portfolio basis provided each of the non­performing  financial assets of the pool has remained as non­performing  financial asset for at least 2 years in the books of the selling bank. The  pool of assets would be treated as a single asset in the  books of the purchasing bank.
xii)   The  selling bank shall pursue the staff  accountability aspects as per the existing instructions in  respect of the non­performing assets sold to other banks.
7.4.  Prudential norms for banks for  the purchase/ sale transactions
(A)
Asset  classification norms
(i)   The  non­performing financial asset purchased, may be classified  as ‘standard’ in the books of the purchasing bank for a period  of 90 days from the date of purchase. Thereafter, the asset classification  status of the financial asset purchased, shall be determined by the  record of recovery in the books of the purchasing bank with  reference to cash flows estimated while purchasing the asset which should  be in compliance with requirements in Para 7.3 (iv).
(ii)  The  asset classification status of an existing exposure (other than purchased  financial asset) to the same obligor in the books of the purchasing  bank will continue to be governed by the record of recovery of that  exposure and hence may be different.
(iii)   Where  the purchase/sale does not satisfy any of the prudential  requirements prescribed in these guidelines the asset classification  status of the financial asset in the books of the purchasing  bank at the time of purchase shall be the same as in the  books of the selling bank. Thereafter, the asset classification  status will continue to be determined with reference to the date of NPA in  the selling bank.
(iv)   Any restructure/reschedule/rephrase  of the repayment schedule or the estimated cash flow of the non­performing  financial asset by the purchasing bank shall render the account as a  non­performing asset.
(B)
Provisioning  norms
Books of selling bank
i)  When a  bank sells its non­performing financial assets to other  banks, the same will be removed from its books on transfer.
ii)   If the sale is at a price below the  net book value (NBV) (i.e., book value less  provisions held), the shortfall should be debited to  the profit and loss account of that   year.
iii) If the sale is for a value higher  than the NBV, the excess provision shall not be reversed but will be  utilised to meet the shortfall/ loss on account of sale of other nonperforming  financial assets.
Books of purchasing bank
The asset shall attract provisioning requirement  appropriate to its asset classification   status in  the books of the purchasing bank.
(C)
Accounting  of recoveries
Any recovery in respect of a non­performing  asset purchased from other banks should first be adjusted against  its acquisition cost. Recoveries in excess of the acquisition cost  can be recognised as profit.
(D)
Capital  Adequacy
For the purpose of capital adequacy,  banks should assign 100% risk weights to the non­performing  financial assets purchased from other banks. In case the non­performing  asset purchased is an investment, then it would attract capital charge for  market risks also. For NBFCs the relevant instructions on  capital adequacy would be applicable.
(E)
Exposure  Norms
The purchasing bank will reckon exposure on  the obligor of the specific financial asset. Hence these banks should  ensure compliance with the prudential credit exposure ceilings (both  single and group) after reckoning the exposures to the  obligors arising on account of the purchase. For NBFCs the relevant  instructions on exposure norms would be applicable.
7.5.  Disclosure Requirements
Banks which purchase non­performing  financial assets from other banks shall be required to make the  following disclosures in the Notes on Accounts to their Balance  sheets:
A.
Details of non­performing financial  assets purchased:
(Amounts in Rupees crore)
1. (a)  No. of accounts purchased during the  year
(b)   Aggregate outstanding
2. (a)  Of these,  number of accounts restructured during the year
(b)  Aggregate  outstanding
B.
Details of non­performing  financial assets sold:
(Amounts in Rupees crore)
1. No.  of accounts sold
2. Aggregate  outstanding
3. Aggregate  consideration received
C.  The  purchasing bank shall furnish all relevant reports to RBI, credit information  company which has obtained Certificate of Registration from RBI and of which  the bank is a member etc. in respect of the non­performing financial  assets purchased by it.
8.
Writing  off of NPAs
8.1   In  terms of Section 43(D) of the Income Tax Act 1961, income by way of  interest in relation to such categories of bad and doubtful  debts as may be prescribed having regard to the  guidelines issued by the RBI in relation to such debts, shall be  chargeable to tax in the previous year in which it is credited to the  bank’s profit and loss account or received, whichever  is earlier.
8.2   This stipulation  is not applicable to provisioning required to be made as indicated  above. In other words, amounts set aside for making provision for  NPAs as above are not eligible for tax deductions.
8.3   Therefore,  the banks should either make full provision as per the  guidelines or write­-off such advances and claim such tax  benefits as are applicable, by evolving appropriate  methodology in consultation with their auditors/tax consultants.  Recoveries made in such accounts should be offered for tax  purposes as per the rules.
8.4   Write­-off at Head Office Level
Banks may write-­off advances at  Head Office level, even though the relative advances are still outstanding  in the branch books. However, it is necessary that provision  is made as per the classification accorded to the respective  accounts. In other words, if an advance is a loss asset, 100 percent  provision will have to be made therefor.
9. NPA Management – Requirement of Effective  Mechanism and Granular Data
(i) Asset quality of banks is one of the most  important indicators of their financial health. Banks should, therefore put in  place a robust MIS mechanism for early detection of signs of distress at  individual account level as well as at segment level (asset class, industry,  geographic, size, etc.). Such early warning signals should be used for putting  in place an effective preventive asset quality management framework, including  a transparent restructuring mechanism for viable accounts under distress within  the prevailing regulatory framework, for preserving the economic value of those  entities in all segments.
(ii) The banks' IT and MIS system should be  robust and able to generate reliable and quality information with regard to  their asset quality for effective decision making. There should be no  inconsistencies between information furnished under regulatory / statutory  reporting and the banks' own MIS reporting. Banks should also have system  generated segment wise information on non-performing assets and restructured  assets which may include data on the opening balances, additions, reductions  (upgradations, actual recoveries, write-offs etc.), closing balances,  provisions held, technical write-offs, etc.
PART B
Prudential Guidelines on Restructuring of Advances by Banks
10.
Background
10.1 The guidelines issued by the  Reserve Bank of India on restructuring of advances (other than those  restructured under a separate set of guidelines issued by the Rural Planning  and Credit Department (RPCD) of the RBI on restructuring of advances on account  of natural calamities) are divided into the following four categories:
(i)  Guidelines on restructuring of advances  extended to industrial units.
(ii) Guidelines  on restructuring of advances extended to industrial units under the  Corporate Debt  Restructuring (CDR) Mechanism
(iii)  Guidelines  on restructuring of advances extended to Small and Medium   Enterprises  (SME)
(iv) Guidelines  on restructuring of all other advances.
In  these four sets of guidelines on restructuring of advances, the differentiations  were broadly made based on whether a borrower is engaged in an industrial  activity or a non-industrial activity. In addition, an elaborate institutional  mechanism was laid down for accounts restructured under CDR Mechanism. The  major difference in the prudential regulations was in the stipulation that  subject to certain conditions, the accounts of borrowers engaged in industrial  activities (under CDR Mechanism, SME Debt Restructuring Mechanism and outside  these mechanisms) continued to be classified in the existing asset  classification category upon restructuring. This benefit of retention of asset  classification on restructuring was not made available to the accounts of  borrowers engaged in non-industrial activities except to SME borrowers. Another  difference was that the prudential regulations covering the CDR Mechanism and  restructuring of advances extended to SMEs were more detailed and comprehensive  than that covering the restructuring of the rest of the advances including the  advances extended to the industrial units, outside CDR Mechanism. Further, the  CDR Mechanism was made available only to the borrowers engaged in industrial  activities.
10.2 Since the principles underlying  the restructuring of all advances were identical, it was felt that the  prudential regulations needed to be aligned in all cases. Accordingly, the  prudential norms across all categories of debt restructuring mechanisms, other  than those restructured on account of natural calamities which will continue to  be covered by the extant guidelines issued by the RPCD, were harmonised in  August 2008.
10.3 In the backdrop of extraordinary rise in  restructured standard advances, these prudential norms were further revised by  taking into account the recommendations of the Working Group (Chairman: Shri B. Mahapatra) to review  the existing prudential guidelines on restructuring of advances by  banks/financial institutions. These prudential norms  applicable to all restructurings including those under CDR Mechanism are  included in this circular. The details of the institutional / organizational  framework for CDR Mechanism and SME Debt Restructuring Mechanism are given in
Annex  - 4
.
10.4 The CDR Mechanism (
Annex - 4
)  will also be available to the corporates engaged in non-industrial activities,  if they are otherwise eligible for restructuring as per the criteria laid down  for this purpose. Further, banks are also encouraged to strengthen the  co-ordination among themselves in the matter of restructuring of consortium /  multiple banking accounts, which are not covered under the CDR Mechanism.
11.
Key Concepts
Key  concepts used in these guidelines are defined in
Annex - 5
.
12.
General Principles and Prudential Norms for Restructured  Advances
The  principles and prudential norms laid down in this paragraph are applicable to  all advances including the borrowers, who are eligible for special regulatory  treatment for asset classification as specified in para 15.
12.1 Eligibility criteria for restructuring  of advances
12.1.1  Banks may restructure the accounts classified  under 'standard', 'sub- standard'  and 'doubtful' categories.
12.1.2  Banks cannot reschedule / restructure /  renegotiate borrowal accounts   with  retrospective effect. While a restructuring proposal is under consideration,  the  usual asset classification norms  would continue to apply. The process of re-  classification  of an asset should not stop merely because restructuring proposal is   under consideration. The asset  classification status as on the date of approval of the   restructured package by the competent authority would be  relevant to decide the   asset  classification status of the account after restructuring / rescheduling /  renegotiation. In case there is undue delay in  sanctioning a restructuring package  and  in the meantime the asset classification status of the account undergoes  deterioration, it would be a matter of  supervisory concern.
12.1.3  Normally, restructuring cannot take place  unless alteration / changes  in  the original loan agreement are made with the formal consent / application of  the  debtor. However, the process of  restructuring can be initiated by the bank in   deserving  cases subject to customer agreeing to the terms and conditions.
12.1.4  No account will be taken up for restructuring  by the banks unless the financial viability is established and there is a  reasonable certainty of repayment from the borrower, as per the terms of  restructuring package. Any restructuring done without looking into cash flows  of the borrower and assessing the viability of the projects / activity financed  by banks would be treated as an attempt at ever greening a weak credit facility  and would invite supervisory concerns / action. Banks should accelerate the recovery  measures in respect of such accounts. The viability should be determined by the  banks based on the acceptable viability benchmarks determined by them, which  may be applied on a case-by-case basis, depending on merits of each case.  Illustratively, the parameters may include the Return on Capital Employed, Debt  Service Coverage Ratio, Gap between the Internal Rate of Return and Cost of  Funds and the amount of provision required in lieu of the diminution in the  fair value of the restructured advance.  As different sectors of economy have different  performance indicators, it will be desirable that banks adopt these broad  benchmarks with suitable modifications. Therefore, it has been decided that the viability should be determined by the banks  based on the acceptable viability parameters and benchmarks for each parameter  determined by them. The benchmarks for the viability parameters adopted  by the CDR Mechanism are given in the Appendix to Part – B of this Master  Circular and individual banks may suitably adopt them with appropriate  adjustments, if any, for specific sectors while restructuring of accounts in  non-CDR cases.
12.1.5  While the borrowers indulging in frauds and  malfeasance will continue to remain ineligible for restructuring, banks may  review the reasons for classification of the borrowers as wilful defaulters,  specially in old cases where the manner of classification of a borrower as a  wilful defaulter was not transparent, and satisfy itself that the borrower is  in a position to rectify the wilful default. The restructuring of such cases  may be done with Board's approval, while for such accounts the restructuring  under the CDR Mechanism may be carried out with the approval of the Core Group  only.
12.1.6  BIFR cases are not eligible for restructuring  without their express approval. CDR Core Group in the case of advances  restructured under CDR Mechanism, the lead bank in the case of SME Debt  Restructuring Mechanism and the individual banks in other cases, may consider  the proposals for restructuring in such cases, after ensuring that all the  formalities in seeking the approval from BIFR are completed before implementing  the package.
12.2 Asset classification norms
Restructuring  of advances could take place in the following stages:
(a)  before commencement of commercial production  / operation;
(b) after  commencement of commercial production / operation but before  the asset has been  classified as 'sub-standard';
(c)  after  commencement of commercial production / operation and the   asset has been  classified as 'sub-standard' or 'doubtful'.
12.2.1  The accounts classified as 'standard assets'  should be immediately re- classified  as 'sub-standard assets' upon restructuring.
12.2.2  The non-performing assets, upon restructuring,  would continue to have the same asset classification as prior to restructuring  and slip into further lower asset classification categories as per extant asset  classification norms with reference to the pre-restructuring repayment  schedule.
12.2.3  Standard  accounts classified as NPA and NPA accounts retained in the same category on  restructuring by the bank should be upgraded only when all the outstanding  loan/facilities in the account perform satisfactorily during the ‘specified  period’ (
Annex - 5
), i.e. principal and interest on all facilities in the  account are serviced as per terms of payment during that period.
12.2.4  In case, however, satisfactory performance  after the specified period is not evidenced, the asset classification of the  restructured account would be governed as per the applicable prudential norms  with reference to the pre-restructuring payment schedule.
12.2.5  Any additional finance may be treated as  'standard asset' during the specified period (Annex – 5) under the approved  restructuring package. However, in the case of accounts where the  pre-restructuring facilities were classified as 'sub-standard' and 'doubtful',  interest income on the additional finance should be recognised only on cash  basis. If the restructured asset does not qualify for upgradation at the end of  the above specified period, the additional finance shall be placed in the same  asset classification category as the restructured debt.
12.2.6  If a restructured asset, which is a standard  asset on restructuring in terms of para 14.5.2, is subjected to restructuring  on a subsequent occasion, it should be classified as substandard. If the  restructured asset is a sub-standard or a doubtful asset and is subjected to  restructuring, on a subsequent occasion, its asset classification will be  reckoned from the date when it became NPA on the first occasion. However, such  advances restructured on second or more occasion may be allowed to be upgraded  to standard category after the specified period (Annex-5) in terms of the  current restructuring package, subject to satisfactory performance.
12.3 Income recognition norms
Subject  to provisions of paragraphs 12.2.5, 13.2 and 14.2, interest income in respect  of restructured accounts classified as 'standard assets' will be recognized on  accrual basis and that in respect of the accounts classified as 'non-performing  assets' will be recognized on cash basis.
12.4 Provisioning norms
12.4.1 Provision on restructured advances
(i) Banks will hold  provision against the restructured advances as per the extant  provisioning  norms.
(ii) Restructured accounts  classified as standard advances will attract a higher provision (as prescribed  from time to time) in the first two years from the date of restructuring. In  cases of moratorium on payment of interest/principal after restructuring, such  advances will attract the prescribed higher provision for the period covering  moratorium and two years thereafter.
(iii) Restructured accounts  classified as non-performing advances, when upgraded to standard category will  attract a higher provision (as prescribed from time to time) in the first year  from the date of upgradation.
(iv)  The  above-mentioned higher provision on restructured standard advances (2.75 per  cent as prescribed vide circular dated November 26, 2012) would increase to 5  per cent in respect of new restructured standard accounts (flow) with effect  from June 1, 2013 and increase in a phased manner for the stock of restructured  standard accounts as on May 31, 2013 as under:
3.50 per cent -  with effect from March 31, 2014 (spread over the four quarters of 2013-14)
4.25 per cent -  with effect from March 31, 2015 (spread over the four quarters of 2014-15)
5.00 per cent -  with effect from March 31, 2016  (spread over the four quarters of 2015-16)
12.4.2  Provision for diminution in the fair  value of restructured advances
(i)   Reduction in the rate of  interest and / or reschedulement of the repayment of principal amount, as part  of the restructuring, will result in diminution in the fair value of the  advance. Such diminution in value is an economic loss for the bank and will  have impact on the bank's market value of equity. It is, therefore, necessary  for banks to measure such diminution in the fair value of the advance and make  provisions for it by debit to Profit & Loss Account. Such provision should  be held in addition to the provisions as per existing provisioning norms as  indicated in para 12.4.1 above, and in an account distinct from that for normal  provisions.
For this purpose, the erosion in the fair value  of the advance should be computed as the difference between the fair value of  the loan before and after restructuring. Fair value of the loan before  restructuring will be computed as the present value of cash flows representing  the interest at the existing rate charged on the advance before restructuring  and the principal, discounted at a rate equal to the bank's BPLR or base rate
3
(whichever is applicable to the borrower) as on the date of restructuring plus  the appropriate term premium and credit risk premium for the borrower category  on the date of restructuring. Fair value of the loan after restructuring will  be computed as the present value of cash flows representing the interest at the  rate charged on the advance on restructuring and the principal, discounted at a  rate equal to the bank's BPLR or base rate (whichever is applicable to the  borrower) as on the date of restructuring plus the appropriate term premium and  credit risk premium for the borrower category on the date of restructuring.
The above formula moderates the swing in the  diminution of present value of loans with the interest rate cycle and will have  to be followed consistently by banks in future. Further, it is reiterated that  the provisions required as above arise due to the action of the banks resulting  in change in contractual terms of the loan upon restructuring which are in the  nature of financial concessions. These provisions are distinct from the  provisions which are linked to the asset classification of the account  classified as NPA and reflect the impairment due to deterioration in the credit  quality of the loan. Thus, the two types of the provisions are not substitute  for each other.
ii) It was observed that on a few occasions,  there were divergences in the calculation of diminution of fair value of  accounts by banks. Illustratively, divergences could occur if banks are not  appropriately factoring in the term premium on account of elongation of  repayment period on restructuring. In such a case the term premium used while  calculating the present value of cash flows after restructuring would be higher  than the term premium used while calculating the present value of cash flows  before restructuring. Further, the amount of principal converted into  debt/equity instruments on restructuring would need to be held under AFS and  valued as per usual valuation norms. Since these instruments are getting marked  to market, the erosion in fair value gets captured on such valuation.  Therefore, for the purpose of arriving at the erosion in the fair value, the  NPV calculation of the portion of principal not converted into debt/equity has  to be carried out separately. However, the total sacrifice involved for the  bank would be NPV of the above portion plus valuation loss on account of  conversion into debt/equity instruments.
Banks are therefore advised that they should  correctly capture the diminution in fair value of restructured accounts as it  will have a bearing not only on the provisioning required to be made by them  but also on the amount of sacrifice required from the promoters (Ref. para 15.2.2.iv).  Further, there should not be any effort on the part of banks to artificially  reduce the net present value of cash flows by resorting to any sort of  financial engineering. Banks are also advised to put in place a proper  mechanism of checks and balances to ensure accurate calculation of erosion in  the fair value of restructured accounts.
(iii) In the case of working  capital facilities, the diminution in the fair value of the cash credit /  overdraft component may be computed as indicated in para (i) above, reckoning  the higher of the outstanding amount or the limit sanctioned as the principal  amount and taking the tenor of the advance as one year. The term premium in the  discount factor would be as applicable for one year. The fair value of the term  loan components (Working Capital Term Loan and Funded Interest Term Loan) would  be computed as per actual cash flows and taking the term premium in the  discount factor as applicable for the maturity of the respective term loan  components.
(iv) In the event any security is  taken in lieu of the diminution in the fair value of the advance, it should be  valued at Re.1/- till maturity of the security. This will ensure that the  effect of charging off the economic sacrifice to the Profit & Loss account  is not negated.
(v)  The diminution in the fair  value may be re-computed on each balance sheet date till satisfactory  completion of all repayment obligations and full repayment of the outstanding  in the account, so as to capture the changes in the fair value on account of  changes in BPLR or base rate (whichever is applicable to the borrower), term  premium and the credit category of the borrower. Consequently, banks may  provide for the shortfall in provision or reverse the amount of excess  provision held in the distinct account.
(vi) If due to lack of expertise /  appropriate infrastructure, a bank finds it difficult to ensure computation of  diminution in the fair value of advances, as an alternative to the methodology  prescribed above for computing the amount of diminution in the fair value,  banks will have the option of notionally computing the amount of diminution in  the fair value and providing therefor, at five per cent of the total exposure,  in respect of all restructured accounts where the total dues to bank(s) are  less than rupees one crore.
12.4.3  The total provisions required against an  account (normal provisions  plus  provisions in lieu of diminution in the fair value of the advance) are capped  at  100% of the outstanding debt amount.
12.5
Risk-Weights
a.  Restructured housing loans should be risk weighted with an additional risk  weight of 25 percentage points.
b. With a view to reflecting a higher element of inherent  risk which may be latent in entities whose obligations have been subjected to  restructuring / rescheduling either by banks on their own or along with other  bankers / creditors, the unrated standard / performing claims on corporates  should be assigned a higher risk weight of 125% until satisfactory performance  under the revised payment schedule has been established for one year from the  date when the first payment of interest / principal falls due under the revised  schedule.
c. For details on risk weights, Master Circular  DBOD.No.BP.MC.2/21.06.201/2013-14  dated July 1, 2013 on ‘Basel III  Capital Regulations’ may be referred.
13.
Prudential Norms for Conversion of Principal into Debt /  Equity
13.1 Asset classification norms
A part  of the outstanding principal amount can be converted into debt or equity  instruments as part of restructuring. The debt / equity instruments so created  will be classified in the same asset classification category in which the  restructured advance has been classified. Further movement in the asset  classification of these instruments would also be determined based on the  subsequent asset classification of the restructured advance.
13.2 Income recognition norms
13.2.1 Standard Accounts
In the case of restructured  accounts classified as 'standard', the income, if any,  generated by these instruments may be recognised on accrual  basis.
13.2.2 Non- Performing Accounts
In the case of restructured accounts classified as  non-performing assets, the income,   if  any, generated by these instruments may be recognised only on cash basis.
13.3 Valuation and provisioning norms
These  instruments should be held under AFS and valued as per usual valuation norms.  Equity classified as standard asset should be valued either at market value, if  quoted, or at break-up value, if not quoted (without considering the  revaluation reserve, if any) which is to be ascertained from the company's  latest balance sheet. In case the latest balance sheet is not available, the  shares are to be valued at Re. 1. Equity instrument classified as NPA should be  valued at market value, if quoted, and in case where equity is not quoted ,it  should be valued at Re. 1. Depreciation on these instruments should not be  offset against the appreciation in any other securities held under the AFS  category.
14. Prudential Norms for Conversion of Unpaid Interest into  'Funded Interest Term  Loan' (FITL),  Debt or Equity Instruments
14.1 Asset classification norms
The  FITL / debt or equity instrument created by conversion of unpaid interest will  be classified in the same asset classification category in which the  restructured advance has been classified. Further movement in the asset  classification of FITL / debt or equity instruments would also be determined  based on the subsequent asset classification of the restructured advance.
14.2 Income recognition norms
14.2.1 The income, if any, generated  by these instruments may be recognised  on  accrual basis, if these instruments are classified as 'standard', and on cash  basis   in the cases where these have been  classified as a non-performing asset.
14.2.2 The unrealised income represented  by FITL / Debt or equity instrument   should  have a corresponding credit in an account styled as "Sundry Liabilities  Account (Interest Capitalization)".
14.2.3 In the case of conversion of unrealised  interest income into equity,  which is  quoted, interest income can be recognized after the account is upgraded to   standard category at market value of  equity, on the date of such upgradation, not   exceeding  the amount of interest converted into equity.
14.2.4 Only on repayment in case of FITL  or sale / redemption proceeds of the   debt  / equity instruments, the amount received will be recognized in the P&L  Account, while simultaneously reducing the balance in the "Sundry  Liabilities Account (Interest Capitalisation)".
14.2.5 It  is learnt that banks have not uniformly adhered to these instructions. It is  reiterated that whenever the unrealised interest income of a loan is converted  into FITL / Debt or equity instrument, banks must have a corresponding credit  in an account styled as "Sundry Liabilities Account (Interest  Capitalization). Banks are advised to strictly adhere to these instructions and  rectify the position, if required, before finalising their balance sheets for  the financial year 2013-14.
14.3 Valuation & Provisioning norms
Valuation  and provisioning norms would be as per para 13.3 above. The depreciation, if  any, on valuation may be charged to the Sundry Liabilities (Interest  Capitalisation) Account.
15.
Special Regulatory Treatment for Asset Classification
15.1 The special regulatory treatment for asset  classification, in modification to the provisions in this regard stipulated in  para 12, will be available to the borrowers engaged in important business  activities, subject to compliance with certain conditions as e numerated in  para 15.2 below. Such treatment is not extended to the following categories of  advances:
i. Consumer and personal advances;
ii. Advances classified as Capital market exposures;
iii. Advances  classified as commercial real estate exposures
The  asset classification of these three categories accounts as well as that of  other accounts which do not comply with the conditions enumerated in para 15.2,  will be governed by the prudential norms in this regard described in para 12  above.
15.2 Elements of special regulatory framework
The  special regulatory treatment has the following two components:
(i)  Incentive for quick  implementation of the restructuring package.
(ii)  Retention  of the asset classification of the restructured account in the   pre-restructuring  asset classification category
15.2.1  Incentive for quick implementation of the  restructuring package
As  stated in para 12.1.2, during the pendency of the application for restructuring  of the advance with the bank, the usual asset classification norms would  continue to apply. The process of reclassification of an asset should not stop  merely because the application is under consideration. However, as an incentive  for quick implementation of the package, if the approved package is implemented  by the bank as per the following time schedule, the asset classification status  may be restored to the position which existed when the reference was made to  the CDR Cell in respect of cases covered under the CDR Mechanism or when the  restructuring application was received by the bank in non-CDR cases:
(i)  Within 120 days from the  date of approval under the CDR Mechanism.
(ii)  Within  120 days from the date of receipt of application by the bank in  cases other than those restructured  under the CDR Mechanism.
15.2.2  Asset classification benefits
Subject  to the compliance with the undernoted conditions in addition to the   adherence to the prudential  framework laid down in para 12:
(i)  In modification to para 12.2.1,  an existing 'standard asset' will not be  downgraded  to the sub-standard category upon restructuring.
(ii)  In  modification to para 12.2.2, during the specified period, the asset  classification of the sub-standard / doubtful accounts will not deteriorate  upon restructuring, if satisfactory performance is demonstrated during   the specified period.
However,  these benefits will be available subject to compliance with the following  conditions:
i)  The dues to the bank are 'fully  secured' as defined in
Annex - 5
. The condition of being fully secured  by tangible security will not be applicable in the following cases:
(a)  MSE borrowers, where the  outstanding is up to Rs.25 lakh.
(b)  Infrastructure projects, provided the cash flows generated  from  these projects are adequate for  repayment of the advance, the  financing  bank(s) have in place an appropriate mechanism to   escrow the cash flows, and also have a clear and legal first  claim  on these cash flows.
ii) The unit becomes viable in 8 years, if  it is engaged in infrastructure   activities,  and in 5 years in the case of other units.
iii) The repayment period of the restructured advance  including the moratorium, if any, does not exceed 15 years in the case of  infrastructure advances and 10 years in the case of other advances. The  aforesaid ceiling of 10 years would not be applicable for restructured home  loans; in these cases the Board of Directors of the banks should prescribe the  maximum period for restructured advance keeping in view the safety and  soundness of the advances.
iv)  Promoters' sacrifice and  additional funds brought by them should be a minimum of 20 per cent of  banks’ sacrifice or 2 per cent of the restructured debt, whichever is higher.  This stipulation is the minimum and banks may decide on a higher sacrifice by  promoters depending on the riskiness of the project and promoters’ ability to  bring in higher sacrifice amount. Further, such higher sacrifice may invariably  be insisted upon in larger accounts, especially CDR accounts. The promoters’  sacrifice should invariably be brought upfront while extending the  restructuring benefits to the borrowers. The  term 'bank's sacrifice' means the amount of "erosion in the fair value of  the advance" or “total sacrifice”, to be computed as per the methodology  enumerated in para 12.4.2 (i) and (ii) above.
(Prior to May 30,  2013,  if  banks were convinced that the promoters face genuine difficulty in bringing  their share of the sacrifice immediately and need some extension of time to  fulfill their commitments, the promoters could be allowed to bring in 50% of  their sacrifice, i.e. 50% of 15%, upfront and the balance within a period of  one year. However, in such cases, if the promoters fail to bring in their  balance share of sacrifice within the extended time limit of one year, the  asset classification benefits derived by banks will cease to accrue and the  banks will have to revert to classifying such accounts as per the asset  classification norms specified under para 12.2 of this circular.)
v) Promoter’s contribution need not necessarily  be brought in cash and can be brought in the form of de-rating of equity,  conversion of unsecured loan brought by the promoter into equity and interest  free loans.
vi) The restructuring under consideration is not a 'repeated  restructuring' as defined in para (v) of
Annex -  5
.
15.2.3.  In line with the recommendation of the Working Group (Chairman: Shri B. Mahapatra) to review the  existing prudential guidelines on restructuring of advances by banks/financial institutions, the extant incentive for quick implementation of  restructuring package and asset classification benefits (paragraph 15.2.1 &  15.2.2 above)  available on restructuring  on fulfilling the conditions  will  however be withdrawn for all restructurings effective from April 1, 2015 with  the exception of provisions related to changes in DCCO in respect of  infrastructure as well as non-infrastructure project loans (please see para  4.2.15). It implies that with effect from April 1, 2015, a standard account on  restructuring (for reasons other than change in DCCO) would be immediately  classified as sub-standard on restructuring as also the non-performing assets,  upon restructuring, would continue to have the same asset classification as  prior to restructuring and slip into further lower asset classification  categories as per the extant asset classification norms with reference to the  pre-restructuring repayment schedule.
16.
Miscellaneous
16.1 The banks should decide on the  issue regarding convertibility (into equity) option as a part of restructuring  exercise whereby the banks / financial institutions shall have the right to  convert a portion of the restructured amount into equity, keeping in view the  statutory requirement under Section 19 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, (in  the case of banks) and relevant SEBI regulations.
16.2 Conversion  of debt into preference shares should be done only as a last resort and such  conversion of debt into equity/preference shares should, in any case, be  restricted to a cap (say 10 per cent of the restructured debt). Further, any  conversion of debt into equity should be done only in the case of listed  companies.
16.3  Acquisition of equity shares / convertible bonds / convertible debentures in  companies by way of conversion of debt / overdue interest can be done without  seeking prior approval from RBI, even if by such acquisition the prudential  capital market exposure limit prescribed by the RBI is breached. However, this  will be subject to reporting of such holdings to RBI, Department of Banking  Supervision (DBS), every month along with the regular DSB Return on Asset  Quality. Nonetheless, banks will have to comply with the provisions of Section  19(2) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
16.4 Acquisition of non-SLR securities  by way of conversion of debt is exempted from the mandatory rating requirement  and the prudential limit on investment in unlisted non-SLR securities,  prescribed by the RBI, subject to periodical reporting to the RBI in the  aforesaid DSB return.
16.5 Banks  may consider incorporating in the approved restructuring packages creditor’s  rights to accelerate repayment and the borrower’s right to pre pay. Further, all restructuring  packages must incorporate ‘Right to recompense’ clause and it should be based  on certain performance criteria of the borrower. In any case, minimum 75 per  cent of the recompense amount should be recovered by the lenders and in cases  where some facility under restructuring has been extended below base rate, 100  per cent of the recompense amount should be recovered.
16.6 As  stipulating personal guarantee will ensure promoters’ “skin in the game” or  commitment to the restructuring package, promoters’ personal  guarantee should be obtained in all cases of restructuring and corporate  guarantee cannot be accepted as a substitute for personal guarantee. However,  corporate guarantee can be accepted in those cases where the promoters of a  company are not individuals but other corporate bodies or where the individual  promoters cannot be clearly identified.
17.
Disclosures
With  effect from the financial year 2012-13, banks should  disclose in their published annual Balance  Sheets, under "Notes on Accounts", information relating to number and  amount of advances restructured, and the amount of diminution in the fair value  of the restructured advances as per the format given in
Annex - 6
. The  information would be required for advances restructured under CDR Mechanism,  SME Debt Restructuring Mechanism and other categories separately. Banks must disclose the total amount outstanding in all the accounts /  facilities of borrowers whose accounts have been restructured along with the  restructured part or facility. This means even if only one of the facilities /  accounts of a borrower has been restructured, the bank should also disclose the  entire outstanding amount pertaining to all the facilities / accounts of that  particular borrower. The disclosure format prescribed in Annex-6, inter-alia,  includes the following:
i.  details of accounts restructured on a cumulative basis excluding the standard  restructured accounts which cease to attract higher provision and risk weight  (if applicable);
ii.  provisions made on restructured accounts under various categories; and
iii. details of movement of  restructured accounts.
This  implies that once the higher provisions and risk weights (if applicable) on  restructured advances (classified as standard either
abinitio
or on  upgradation from NPA category) revert to the normal level on account of  satisfactory performance during the prescribed period, such advances should no  longer be required to be disclosed by banks as restructured accounts in the  “Notes on Accounts” in their Annual Balance Sheets. However, the provision for  diminution in the fair value of restructured accounts on such restructured  accounts should continue to be  maintained by banks as per the existing instructions.
18.   It  has been reiterated that the basic objective of restructuring is to preserve  economic value of units, not ever-greening of problem accounts. This can be  achieved by banks and the borrowers only by careful assessment of the  viability, quick detection of weaknesses in accounts and a time-bound  implementation of restructuring packages.
Appendix  to Part B
Broad benchmarks for the viability parameters
Return on capital  employed should be at least equivalent to 5 year Government security yield plus  2 per cent.
The debt service  coverage ratio should be greater than 1.25 within the 5 years period in which  the unit should become viable and on year to year basis the ratio should be  above 1. The normal debt service coverage ratio for 10 years repayment period  should be around 1.33.
The benchmark gap  between internal rate of return and cost of capital should be at least 1per  cent.
Operating and cash  break even points should be worked out and they should be comparable with the  industry norms.
Trends of the  company based on historical data and future projections should be comparable  with the industry. Thus behaviour of past and future EBIDTA should be studied  and compared with industry average.
Loan life ratio (LLR), as defined below should be 1.4,  which would give a cushion of 40% to the amount of loan to be serviced.
Present value of total available cash flow (ACF)  during the loan life period (including interest and principal)
LLR=  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Maximum amount of  loan
Part C
C-1 Early Recognition of Financial Distress, Prompt Steps for Resolution  and Fair Recovery for Lenders:
Framework for Revitalising Distressed Assets in  the Economy
19. Introduction
In the backdrop of the slowdown of the Indian economy, and resulting  increase in Non-Performing Assets (NPAs) and restructured accounts in the  Indian banking system during the recent years, a need was felt to ensure that  the banking system recognise financial distress early, takes prompt steps to  resolve it, and ensures fair recovery for lenders and investors. Accordingly, a  Framework for revitalising distressed assets in the economy was placed on RBI  website on December 17, 2013 as a
Discussion  Paper
for comments by January 1,  2014. Taking into account the comments received, the Reserve Bank issued the ‘
Framework for Revitalising Distressed Assets in  the Economy
’ on its website on January 30, 2014, outlining a corrective action plan that will  incentivize early identification of problem account, timely restructuring of  accounts which are considered to be viable, and taking prompt steps by lenders  for recovery or sale of unviable accounts.
Guidelines on Joint Lenders’ Forum (JLF) and  Corrective Action Plan (CAP)
20. These guidelines will  be applicable for lending under Consortium and Multiple Banking Arrangements  (MBA) [except instructions in paragraphs 21.1, 26.1, 27 & 28 below, which  will be applicable in all cases of lending], and should be read with our  prudential norms on ‘Restructuring of Advances by banks’ as contained in Part B  of this Master Circular and any other instruction issued in this regard from time  to time.
21. Formation of Joint  Lenders’ Forum
21.1 As proposed in paragraph 2.1.1 of the
Framework
,  before a loan account turns into a NPA, banks are required to identify incipient stress in the  account by creating three sub-categories under the Special Mention Account (SMA
4
)  category as given in the table below:
SMA Sub-categories
Basis for classification
SMA-0
Principal or interest payment not overdue for more than 30 days but    account showing  signs of incipient    stress (Please see Appendix to    Part C)
SMA-1
Principal or interest payment overdue between 31-60 days
SMA-2
Principal or interest payment overdue between 61-90 days
21.2 It was also proposed  in the Framework that the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) will set up a Central  Repository of Information on Large Credits (CRILC) to collect, store, and  disseminate credit data to lenders. Accordingly, our Department of Banking  Supervision (DBS) has advised vide
circular
DBS.No.OSMOS.9862/33.01.018/2013-14  dated February 13, 2014
on  ‘Central Repository of Information on Large Credits (CRILC) – Revision in  Reporting’ that banks will be required to report credit information, including  classification of an account as SMA to CRILC on all their borrowers having  aggregate fund-based and non-fund based exposure of Rs.50 million and above  with them. DBS has further updated  these reporting requirements vide their
circular
DBS.OSMOS.No.14703/33.01.001/2013-14  dated May 22, 2014
on ‘Reporting to Central  Repository of Information on Large Credits (CRILC)’.
21.3 Banks are advised that  as soon as an account  is reported by any  of the lenders to CRILC as SMA-2, they should mandatorily form a committee to  be called Joint Lenders’ Forum (JLF) if the aggregate exposure (AE) [fund based  and non-fund based taken together] of lenders in that account is Rs 1000  million and above. Lenders also have the option of forming a JLF even when the  AE in an account is less than Rs.1000 million and/or when the account is  reported as SMA-0 or SMA-1.
21.4 While the existing  Consortium Arrangement for consortium accounts will serve as JLF with the  Consortium Leader as convener, for accounts under Multiple Banking  Arrangements (MBA), the lender with the highest AE will convene JLF at the  earliest and facilitate exchange of credit information on the account. In case  there are multiple consortium of lenders for a borrower (e.g. separate  consortium for working capital and term loans), the lender with the highest AE  will convene the JLF.
21.5 It is possible that a  borrower may request the lender/s, with substantiated grounds, for formation of  a JLF on account of imminent stress. When such a request is received by a  lender, the account should be reported to CRILC as SMA-0, and the lenders  should also form the JLF immediately if the AE is Rs. 1000 million and above.  It is, however, clarified that for the present, JLF formation is optional in  other cases of SMA-0 reporting.
21.6 All the lenders should  formulate and sign an Agreement (which may be called JLF agreement)  incorporating the broad rules for the functioning of the JLF.  The Indian  Banks’ Association (IBA) has prepared a Master JLF agreement and operational  guidelines for JLF which can be adopted by all lenders. The JLF should explore  the possibility of the borrower setting right the irregularities/weaknesses in  the account. The JLF may invite representatives of the Central/State  Government/Project authorities/Local authorities, if they have a role in the  implementation of the project financed.
21.7 While JLF formation  and subsequent corrective actions will be mandatory in accounts having AE of  Rs.1000 million and above, in other cases also the lenders will have  to monitor the asset quality closely and take corrective action for  effective resolution as deemed appropriate.
22 Corrective Action Plan  (CAP) by JLF
22.1 The JLF may explore  various options to resolve the stress in the account. The intention is not to  encourage a particular resolution option, e.g. restructuring or recovery, but  to arrive at an early and feasible solution to preserve the economic value of  the underlying assets as well as the lenders’ loans. The options under  Corrective Action Plan (CAP) by the JLF would generally include:
(a) Rectification -
Obtaining a specific commitment from the  borrower to regularise the account so that the account comes out of SMA  status or does not slip into the NPA category. The commitment should be  supported with identifiable cash flows within the required time period and  without involving any loss or sacrifice on the part of the existing lenders. If  the existing promoters are not in a position to bring in additional money or  take any measures to regularise the account, the possibility of getting some  other equity/strategic investors to the company may be explored by the JLF in  consultation with the borrower. These measures are intended to turn-around the  entity/company without any change in terms and conditions of the loan. The JLF  may also consider providing need based additional finance to the borrower, if  considered necessary, as part of the rectification process. However, it should  be strictly ensured that additional financing is not provided with a view to  ever-greening the account.
(b) Restructuring -
Consider the possibility of restructuring  the account if it is prima facie viable and the borrower is not a wilful  defaulter, i.e., there is no diversion of funds, fraud or malfeasance,  etc.  At this stage, commitment from promoters for extending their  personal guarantees along with their net worth statement supported by copies of  legal titles to assets may be obtained along with a declaration that they would  not undertake any transaction that would alienate assets without the permission  of the JLF. Any deviation from the commitment by the borrowers affecting the  security/recoverability of the loans may be treated as a valid factor for  initiating recovery process. For this action to be sustainable, the lenders in  the JLF may sign an Inter Creditor Agreement (ICA) and also require the  borrower to sign the Debtor Creditor Agreement (DCA) which would provide the  legal basis for any restructuring process. The formats used by the Corporate  Debt Restructuring (CDR) mechanism for ICA and DCA could be considered, if  necessary with appropriate changes. Further, a ‘stand still’
5
clause could be stipulated in the DCA to enable a smooth process of  restructuring. The ‘stand-still’ clause does not mean that the borrower is  precluded from making payments to the lenders. The ICA may also stipulate that  both secured and unsecured creditors need to agree to the final resolution.
(c) Recovery -
Once the first two options at (a) and (b)  above are seen as not feasible, due recovery process may be resorted to. The  JLF may decide the best recovery process to be followed, among the various  legal and other recovery options available, with a view to optimising the  efforts and results.
22.2 The decisions agreed  upon by a minimum of 75% of creditors by value and 60% of creditors by number  in the JLF would be considered as the basis for proceeding with the  restructuring  of the account, and will  be binding on all lenders under the terms of the ICA. However, if the JLF  decides to proceed with recovery, the minimum criteria for binding decision, if  any, under any relevant laws/Acts would be applicable.
22.3 The JLF is required to  arrive at an agreement on the option to be adopted for CAP within 30 days from  (i) the date of an account being reported as SMA-2 by one or more lender, or  (ii) receipt of request from the borrower to form a JLF, with substantiated  grounds, if it senses imminent stress. The JLF should sign off the detailed  final CAP within the next 30 days from the date of arriving at such an  agreement.
22.4 If the JLF decides on  options 22.1 (a) or (b), but the account fails to perform as per the agreed  terms under option (a) or (b), the JLF should initiate recovery under option  22.1 (c).
23.  Restructuring  Process
23.1 Prudential guidelines on  restructuring of advances as contained in Part B of this Master Circular lay  down detailed methodology and norms for restructuring of advances under sole  banking as well as multiple/ consortium arrangements. Corporate Debt  Restructuring (CDR) mechanism, as described in Annex 4 of this Master Circular,  is an institutional framework for restructuring of multiple/ consortium advances  of banks where even creditors who are not part of CDR system can join by  signing transaction to transaction based agreements.
23.2 If the JLF decides restructuring of the  account as CAP, it will have the option of either referring the account to CDR  Cell after a decision to restructure is taken under para 22.1 as indicated  above or restructure the same independent of the CDR mechanism.
23.3 Restructuring by JLF
23.3.1 If the JLF decides to restructure an  account independent of the CDR mechanism, the JLF should carry out the detailed  Techno-Economic Viability (TEV) study, and if found viable, finalise the  restructuring package within 30 days from the date of signing off the final CAP  as mentioned in paragraph 22.3 above.
23.3.2 For accounts with AE of less than Rs.5000  million, the above-mentioned restructuring package should be approved by the  JLF and conveyed by the lenders to the borrower within the next 15 days for  implementation.
23.3.3 For accounts with AE of Rs.5000 million  and above, the above-mentioned TEV study and restructuring package will have to  be subjected to an evaluation by an Independent Evaluation Committee (IEC)
6
of experts  fulfilling certain eligibility conditions. The IEC will look into the  viability aspects after ensuring that the terms of restructuring are fair to  the lenders. The IEC will be required to give their  recommendation in these cases to the JLF within a period of 30 days.  Thereafter, considering the views of IEC if  the JLF decides to go ahead with the restructuring, the restructuring package  including all terms and conditions as mutually agreed upon between the lenders  and borrower, would have to be approved by all the lenders and communicated to  the borrower within next 15 days for implementation.
23.3.4 Asset Classification benefit as  applicable under the extant guidelines will accrue to such restructured  accounts as if they were restructured under CDR mechanism. For this purpose,  the asset classification of the account as on the date of formation of JLF will  be taken into account.
23.3.5 The above-mentioned time limits are  maximum permitted time periods and the JLF should try to arrive at a  restructuring package as soon as possible in cases of simple restructuring.
23.3.6 Restructuring cases  will be taken up by the JLF only in respect of assets reported as Standard, SMA  or Sub-Standard by one or more lenders of the JLF. While generally no account  classified as doubtful should be considered by the JLF for restructuring, in  cases where a small portion of debt is doubtful i.e.  the account is standard/sub-standard in the books of at least 90% of creditors  (by value), the account may then be considered under JLF for restructuring.
23.3.7 Wilful defaulters  will normally not be eligible for restructuring. However, the JLF may review  the reasons for classification of the borrower as a wilful defaulter and  satisfy itself that the borrower is in a position to rectify the wilful  default. The decision to restructure such cases should however also have the  approvals of the board/s of individual bank/s within the JLF who have  classified the borrower as wilful defaulter.
23.3.8 The viability of the  account should be determined by the JLF based on acceptable viability  benchmarks determined by them. Illustratively, the parameters may include the  Debt Equity Ratio, Debt Service Coverage Ratio, Liquidity/Current Ratio and the  amount of provision required in lieu of the diminution in the fair value of the  restructured advance, etc. Further, the JLF may consider the benchmarks for the  viability parameters adopted by the CDR mechanism (as mentioned in Appendix to Part B of this Master Circular) and adopt the same with suitable adjustments  taking into account the fact that different sectors of the economy have  different performance indicators.
23.4 Restructuring Referred by the JLF to the  CDR Cell
23.4.1 If the JLF decides  to refer the account to CDR Cell after a decision to restructure is taken under  para 22.1, the following procedure may be followed.
23.4.2 As the preliminary  viability of account has already been decided by the JLF, CDR Cell should  directly prepare the Techno-Economic Viability (TEV) study and restructuring  plan in consultation with JLF within 30 days from the date of reference to it  by the JLF.
23.4.3 For accounts with AE  of less than Rs.5000 million, the above-mentioned restructuring package should  be submitted to CDR Empowered Group (EG) for approval. Under extant  instructions, CDR EG can approve or suggest modifications but ensure that a  final decision is taken within a total period of 90 days, which can be extended  up to a maximum of 180 days from the date of reference to CDR Cell. However,  the cases referred to CDR Cell by JLF will have to be finally decided by the  CDR EG within the next 30 days. If approved by CDR EG, the restructuring  package should be approved by all lenders and conveyed to the borrower within  the next 30 days for implementation.
23.4.4 For accounts with AE  of Rs.5000 million and above, the TEV study and restructuring package prepared  by CDR Cell will have to be subjected to an evaluation by an Independent  Evaluation Committee (IEC) of experts. As stated in paragraph 23.3.3, composition and other details of the IEC has been communicated separately by IBA to  banks. The IEC will look into the viability aspects after ensuring that  the terms of restructuring are fair to the lenders. The IEC will be required to  give their recommendation in these aspects to the CDR Cell under advice to JLF  within a period of 30 days. Thereafter, considering the views of IEC if the JLF  decides to go ahead with the restructuring, the same should be communicated to  CDR Cell and CDR Cell should submit the restructuring package to CDR EG within  a total period of 7 days from receiving the views of IEC. Thereafter, CDR EG should  decide on the approval/modification/rejection within the next 30 days. If  approved by CDR EG, the restructuring package should be approved by all lenders  and conveyed to the borrower within the next 30 days for implementation.
24.  Other  Issues/Conditions Relating to Restructuring by JLF/CDR Cell
24.1 Both under JLF and CDR  mechanism, the restructuring package should also stipulate the timeline during  which certain viability milestones (e.g. improvement in certain financial  ratios after a period of time, say, 6 months or 1 year and so on) would be  achieved. The JLF must periodically review the account for  achievement/non-achievement of milestones and should consider initiating  suitable measures including recovery measures as deemed appropriate.
24.2 Restructuring whether under JLF or CDR is  to be completed within the specified time periods. The JLF and CDR Cell should  optimally utilise the specified time periods so that the aggregate time limit  is not breached under any mode of restructuring. If the JLF/CDR takes a shorter  time for an activity as against the prescribed limit, then it can have the  discretion to utilise the saved time for other activities provided the  aggregate time limit is not breached.
24.3 The general principle  of restructuring should be that the shareholders bear the first loss rather  than the debt holders. With this principle in view and also to ensure more  ‘skin in the game’ of promoters, JLF/CDR may consider the following options  when a loan is restructured:
Possibility       of  transferring  equity of the company  by promoters to       the lenders to  compensate for their sacrifices;
Promoters infusing more equity into their companies;
Transfer of the promoters’ holdings to a  security trustee or an escrow arrangement till turnaround of company. This will  enable a change in management control, should lenders favour it.
24.4 In case a borrower has  undertaken diversification or expansion of the activities which has resulted in  the stress on the core-business of the group, a clause for sale of non-core  assets or other assets may be stipulated as a condition for restructuring the  account, if under the TEV study the account is likely to become viable on  hiving-off of non-core activities and other assets.
24.5 For  restructuring of dues in respect of listed companies, lenders may be ab-initio  compensated for their loss/sacrifice (diminution in fair value of account in  net present value terms) by way of issuance of equities of the company upfront,  subject to the extant regulations and statutory requirements. In such cases,  the restructuring agreement shall not incorporate any right of recompense  clause. However, if the lenders’ sacrifice is not fully compensated by way of  issuance of equities, the right of recompense clause may be incorporated to the  extent of shortfall. For unlisted companies, the JLF will have option of either  getting equities issued or incorporate suitable ‘right to recompense’ clause.
24.6 Paragraph 2.2 of our  circular
DBOD.No.Dir.BC.47/13.07.05/2006-07  dated December 15, 2006
on  ‘Limits on Banks’ Exposure to Capital Markets’ stipulates certain limits on  banks’ exposure to Capital Markets. In partial modification of the circular  ibid, it has been decided that if acquisition of equity shares, as indicated in  paragraph 24.5 above, results in exceeding the extant regulatory Capital Market  Exposure (CME) limit, the same will not be considered as a breach of regulatory  limit. However, this will require reporting to RBI and disclosure by banks in  the Notes to Accounts in Annual Financial  Statements.
24.7 In order to  distinguish the differential security interest available to secured lenders,  partially secured lenders and unsecured lenders, the JLF/CDR could consider  various options like:
Prior       agreement in the ICA among the above classes of lenders regarding       repayments, say, as per an agreed waterfall mechanism;
A structured agreement stipulating priority of secured creditors;
Appropriation of repayment proceeds among  secured, partially secured and unsecured lenders in certain pre-agreed  proportion.
The above is only an  illustrative list and the JLF may decide on a mutually agreed option. It also  needs to be emphasised that while one bank may have a better security interest  when it comes to one borrower, the case may be vice versa in the case of  another borrower. So, it would be beneficial if lenders appreciate the concerns  of fellow lenders and arrive at a mutually agreed option with a view to  preserving the economic value of assets. Once an option is agreed upon, the  bank having the largest exposure may take the lead in ensuring distribution  according to agreed terms once the restructuring package is implemented.
24.8 As regards  prudential norms and operational details, RBI’s guidelines on CDR Mechanism,  including OTS, will be applicable to the extent that they are not inconsistent  with these guidelines.
25. Prudential Norms on  Asset Classification and Provisioning
25.1 While a restructuring  proposal is under consideration by the JLF/CDR, the usual asset classification  norm would continue to apply. The process of re-classification of an asset  should not stop merely because restructuring proposal is under consideration by  the JLF/CDR.
25.2 However, as an  incentive for quick implementation of a restructuring package, the special asset  classification benefit on restructuring of accounts as per extant instructions  would be available for accounts undertaken for restructuring under these  guidelines, subject to adherence to the overall timeframe for approval of  restructuring package detailed in paragraphs 23.3 and 23.4 above and  implementation of the approved package within 90 days from the date of  approval. The asset classification status as on the date of formation of JLF  would be the relevant date to decide the asset classification status of the  account after implementation of the final restructuring package. As mentioned  in paragraph 15.2.3 in Part – B of this Master Circular, the special asset  classification benefit as above will however be withdrawn for all  restructurings with effect from April 1, 2015 with the exception of provisions  related to changes in Date of Commencement of Commercial Operations (DCCO) in  respect of infrastructure and non-infrastructure project loans.
25.3 As a measure to ensure  adherence to the proposals made in these guidelines as also to impose  disincentives on borrowers for not maintaining credit discipline, accelerated  provisioning norms (as detailed in paragraph 26 below) are being introduced.
26. Accelerated  Provisioning
26.1 In cases where banks  fail to report SMA status of the accounts to CRILC or resort to methods with  the intent to conceal the actual status of the accounts or evergreen the  account, banks will be subjected to accelerated provisioning for these accounts  and/or other supervisory actions as deemed appropriate by RBI. The current  provisioning requirement and the revised accelerated provisioning in respect of  such non performing accounts are as under:
Asset Classification
Period as NPA
Current provisioning (%)
Revised accelerated provisioning (%)
Sub-    standard
(secured)
Up to 6 months
15
No change
6 months to 1 year
15
25
Sub-standard (unsecured ab-initio)
Up to 6 months
25 (other than infrastructure loans)
25
20 (infrastructure loans)
6 months to 1 year
25 (other than infrastructure loans)
40
20    (infrastructure loans)
Doubtful  I
2nd year
25 (secured    portion)
40 (secured portion)
100 (unsecured portion)
100 (unsecured portion)
Doubtful     II
3rd & 4th year
40 (secured    portion)
100 for both secured and unsecured portions
100 (unsecured portion)
Doubtful III
5th year onwards
100
100
26.2 Further, any of the  lenders who have agreed to the restructuring decision under the CAP by JLF and  is a signatory to the ICA and DCA, but changes their stance later on, or  delays/refuses to implement the package, will also be subjected to accelerated  provisioning requirement as indicated at para 26.1 above, on their exposure to  this borrower i.e., if it is classified as an NPA. If the account is standard  in those lenders’ books, the provisioning requirement would be 5%. Further, any  such backtracking by a lender might attract negative supervisory view during  Supervisory Review and Evaluation Process.
26.3 Presently, asset  classification is based on record of recovery at individual banks and  provisioning is based on asset classification status at the level of each bank.  However, if lenders  fail to convene the JLF or fail to agree upon a  common CAP within the stipulated time frame, the account will be subjected to  accelerated provisioning as indicated at para 26.1 above, if it is classified  as an NPA. If the account is standard in those lenders’ books, the provisioning  requirement would be 5%.
26.4 If an escrow  maintaining bank under JLF/CDR mechanism does not appropriate proceeds of repayment  by the borrower among the lenders as per agreed terms resulting into down  gradation of asset classification of the account in books of other lenders, the  account with the escrow maintaining bank will attract the asset classification  which is lowest among the lending member banks, and corresponding provisioning  requirement.
27. Wilful Defaulters and  Non-Cooperative Borrowers
27.1 Instructions regarding treatment of Wilful Defaulters  are contained in our Master Circular DBOD  No. CID.BC. 3 /20.16.003/2013-14 dated July 1, 2013 on ‘Wilful Defaulters’ updated from time to time.  Banks are required to strictly adhere to these guidelines. In addition to these instructions and with a view to ensuring better corporate governance  structure in companies and ensuring accountability of independent/professional  directors, promoters, auditors, etc. henceforth, the following prudential  measures will be applicable:
(a) The provisioning in respect of existing  loans/exposures of banks to companies having director/s (other than nominee  directors of government/financial institutions brought on board at the time of  distress), whose name/s appear more than once in the list of wilful defaulters,  will be 5% in cases of standard accounts; if such account is classified as NPA,  it will attract accelerated provisioning as indicated at para 26.1 above. This  is a prudential measure since the expected losses on exposures to such  borrowers are likely to be higher. It is reiterated that no additional  facilities should be granted by any bank/FI to the listed wilful defaulters, in  terms of paragraph 2.5 (a) of Master Circular on Wilful Defaulters dated July  1, 2013.
(b) With a view to discouraging  borrowers/defaulters from being unreasonable and non-cooperative with lenders  in their bonafide resolution/recovery efforts, banks may classify such  borrowers as non-cooperative borrowers
7
,  after giving them due notice if satisfactory clarifications are not furnished. Banks will be  required to report classification of such borrowers to CRILC. Further, banks  will be required to make higher/accelerated provisioning in respect of new  loans/exposures to such borrowers as also new loans/exposures to any other  company promoted by such promoters/ directors or to a company on whose board  any of the promoter / directors of this non-cooperative borrower is a director.  The provisioning applicable in such cases will be at the rate of 5% if it is a  standard account and accelerated provisioning as per para 26.1 above, if it is  an NPA. This is a prudential measure since the expected losses on exposures to  such non-cooperative borrowers are likely to be higher.
28. Dissemination of Information
28.1 At present, the list of Suit filed accounts  of Wilful Defaulters (Rs.2.5 million and above) is submitted by banks to the  Credit Information Companies (CICs) of which they are member(s), who display  the same on their respective websites as and when received. The list of  non-suit filed accounts of Wilful Defaulters (Rs.2.5 million and above) is  confidential and is disseminated by RBI among banks and FIs only for their own  use. In order to make the current system of banks/FIs reporting names of suit  filed accounts and non-suit filed accounts of Wilful Defaulters and its  availability to the banks by CICs/RBI as current as possible, banks are advised  to forward data on wilful defaulters to the CICs/Reserve Bank at the earliest  but not later than a month from the reporting date and they must use/ furnish  the detailed information as per the format prescribed in our Master Circular  DBOD.No.CID.BC.3/20.16.003/2013-14 dated July 1, 2013 on ‘Wilful Defaulters’.
28.2 In terms of our Master Circular on Wilful  Defaulters mentioned above, in case any  falsification of accounts on the part of the borrowers is observed by the banks  / FIs, and if it is observed that the auditors were negligent or deficient in  conducting the audit, banks should lodge a formal complaint against the  auditors of the borrowers with the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India  (ICAI) to enable the ICAI to examine and fix accountability of the auditors.  RBI reiterates these instructions for strict compliance. Pending disciplinary action by ICAI, the complaints  may also be forwarded to the RBI (Department of Banking Supervision, Central  Office) and IBA for records. IBA would circulate the names of the CA firms  against whom many complaints have been received amongst all banks who should  consider this aspect before assigning any work to them. RBI would also share  such information with other financial sector regulators/Ministry of Corporate  Affairs (MCA)/Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG).
28.3 Further, banks may  seek explanation from advocates who wrongly certify as to clear legal titles in  respect of assets or valuers who overstate the security value, by negligence or  connivance, and if no reply/satisfactory clarification is received from them  within one month, they may report their names to IBA. The IBA may circulate the  names of such advocates/valuers among its members for consideration before  availing of their services in future. The IBA would create a central  registry for this purpose.
29. These guidelines have  become effective from April 1, 2014.
Appendix to Part C-1
SMA-0 Signs of Stress
Illustrative list of signs  of stress for categorising an account as SMA-0:
1. Delay of 90 days or more  in (a) submission of stock statement / other stipulated operating control  statements or (b) credit monitoring or financial statements or (c) non-renewal  of facilities based on audited financials.
2.  Actual sales /  operating profits falling short of projections accepted for loan sanction by  40% or more; or a single event of non-cooperation / prevention from conduct of  stock audits by banks; or reduction of Drawing Power (DP) by 20% or more after  a stock audit; or evidence of diversion of funds for unapproved purpose; or  drop in internal risk rating by 2 or more notches in a single review.
3.  Return of 3 or  more cheques (or electronic debit instructions) issued by borrowers in 30 days  on grounds of non-availability of balance/DP in the account or return of 3 or  more bills / cheques discounted or sent under collection by the borrower.
4. Devolvement of Deferred  Payment Guarantee (DPG) instalments or Letters of Credit (LCs) or invocation of  Bank Guarantees (BGs) and its non-payment within 30 days.
5. Third request for  extension of time either for creation or perfection of securities as against  time specified in original sanction terms
or
for compliance with any  other terms and conditions of sanction.
6. Increase in frequency of  overdrafts in current accounts.
7. The borrower reporting  stress in the business and financials.
8. Promoter(s)  pledging/selling their shares in the borrower company due to financial stress.
C-2:
Framework for Revitalising Distressed Assets in the  Economy -
Refinancing of Project Loans, Sale of NPA and Other Regulatory Measures
30. Paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 of the our
circular DBOD.BP.BC.No.98/21.04.132/2013-14  dated February 26, 2014
on ‘Framework for Revitalising Distressed Assets in the  Economy - Refinancing of Project Loans, Sale of NPA and Other Regulatory  Measures’ contain instructions on sale of financial assets by banks and use of  countercyclical/floating provisions. These instructions have been consolidated  in paragraphs 6 and 7 under Part A of this Master Circular. Detailed guidelines  on the subject of ‘Refinancing of Project Loans’, and other regulatory measures  are as under:
31. Refinancing of Project  Loans
31.1 As per the definition  of a restructured account as given under ‘Key Concepts’ in Annex 5 of this  Master Circular, a  restructured account is one where the bank, for economic or legal reasons  relating to the borrower's financial difficulty, grants to the borrower  concessions that the bank would not otherwise consider. Restructuring would  normally involve modification of terms of the advances/securities, which would  generally include, among others, alteration of repayment period/repayable  amount/ the amount of instalments/rate of interest (due to reasons other than  competitive reasons). Thus, any change in repayment schedule of a loan will  render it as restructured account.
31.2  Further, in terms of DBOD.No.BP.BC.144/21.04.048-2000 dated February 29, 2000  on ‘Income Recognition, Asset Classification, Provisioning and other related  matters and Capital Adequacy Standards - Takeout Finance’, banks can refinance  their existing infrastructure project loans by entering into take-out financing  agreements with any financial institution on a pre-determined basis. If there  is no pre-determined agreement, a standard account in the books of a bank can  still be taken over by other banks/FIs, subject to our guidelines on  ‘Transfer of Borrowal Accounts from one Bank to Another’ issued vide
circular  DBOD.No.BP.BC-104/21.04.048/2011-12 dated May  10, 2012
.
31.3  In partial modification to the above-mentioned circulars, banks are advised  that if they refinance any existing infrastructure and other project loans by  way of take-out financing, even without a pre-determined agreement with other  banks / FIs, and fix a longer repayment period, the same would not be  considered as restructuring if the following conditions are satisfied:
Such loans should be ‘standard’ in the books of       the existing banks, and should have not been restructured in the past.
Such loans should be substantially taken over       (more than 50% of the outstanding loan by value) from the existing       financing banks/Financial institutions.
The repayment period should  be fixed by taking into account the life cycle of the project and cash flows  from the project.
32. Bank Loans for  Financing Promoters’ Contribution
32.1 In terms of extant  instructions on Bank Loans for Financing Promoters Contribution as consolidated inour Master Circular DBOD.No.Dir.BC.14/13.03.00/2013-14 dated July 1,  2013 on ‘Loans and Advances – Statutory and Other Restrictions’, the promoters' contribution towards the equity capital  of a company should come from their own resources and banks should not normally  grant advances to take up shares of other companies.
32.2 It has been decided that  banks can extend finance to ‘specialized’ entities established for acquisition  of troubled companies subject to the general guidelines applicable to advances  against shares/debentures/bonds as contained in the above-mentioned Master  Circular and other regulatory and statutory exposure limits. The lenders  should, however, assess the risks associated with such financing and ensure  that these entities are adequately capitalized, and debt equity ratio for such  entity is not more than 3:1.
32.3 In this connection, a  ‘specialized’ entity will be a body corporate exclusively set up for  the purpose of taking over and turning around troubled companies and promoted  by individuals or/and institutional promoters (including Government) having  professional expertise in turning around ‘troubled companies’ and eligible to  make investments in the industry/segment to which the target asset belonged.
33. Credit Risk Management
33.1 Banks are advised that  they should strictly follow the credit risk management guidelines contained in  our circular DBOD.No.BP.(SC).BC.98/21.04.103/99 dated October  7, 1999 on ‘Risk Management Systems in Banks’ and
DBOD.No.BP.520/21.04.103/2002-03  dated October 12, 2002
on ‘Guidance Notes on Management of  Credit Risk and Market Risk’.
33.2 It is reiterated that lenders should carry out their independent and  objective credit appraisal in all cases and must not depend on credit appraisal  reports prepared by outside consultants, especially the in-house consultants of  the borrowing entity.
33.3 Banks/lenders should  carry out sensitivity tests/scenario analysis, especially for infrastructure  projects, which should inter alia include project delays and cost overruns.  This will aid in taking a view on viability of the project at the time of deciding  Corrective Action Plan (CAP) as mentioned in paragraph 22 of this Master  Circular.
33.4 Lenders should  ascertain the source and quality of equity capital brought in by the promoters  /shareholders. Multiple leveraging, especially, in infrastructure projects, is  a matter of concern as it effectively camouflages the financial ratios such as  Debt/Equity ratio, leading to adverse selection of the borrowers. Therefore,  lenders should ensure at the time of credit appraisal that debt of the parent  company is not infused as equity capital of the subsidiary/SPV.
33.5 Ministry of Corporate  Affairs had introduced the concept  of a Director Identification Number (DIN) with the insertion of Sections 266A  to 266G of Companies (Amendment) Act, 2006. Further, in terms of paragraph 5.4  of our Master Circular on Wilful Defaulters dated July 1, 2013, in order to ensure that directors are correctly  identified and in no case, persons whose names appear to be similar to the  names of directors appearing in the list of wilful defaulters, are wrongfully  denied credit facilities on such grounds, banks/FIs have been advised to  include the Director Identification Number (DIN) as one of the fields in the  data submitted by them to Reserve Bank of India/Credit Information Companies.
33.6 It is reiterated that while carrying out the credit appraisal, banks  should verify as to whether the names of any of the directors of the companies  appear in the list of defaulters/ wilful defaulters by way of reference to  DIN/PAN etc. Further, in case of any doubt arising on account of identical  names, banks should use independent sources for confirmation of the identity of  directors rather than seeking declaration from the borrowing company.
33.7 Paragraph 2.7 of our  Master Circular on Wilful Defaulters states that, “
w
ith a view to monitoring the end-use of funds, if the  lenders desire a specific certification from the borrowers’ auditors regarding  diversion / siphoning of funds by the borrower, the lender should award a  separate mandate to the auditors for the purpose. To facilitate such  certification by the auditors the banks and FIs will also need to ensure that  appropriate covenants in the loan agreements are incorporated to enable award  of such a mandate by the lenders to the borrowers / auditors”.
33.8 In addition to the above, banks are advised  that with a view to ensuring  proper end-use of funds and preventing diversion/siphoning of funds by the  borrowers, lenders could consider engaging their own auditors for such specific  certification purpose without relying on certification given by borrower’s  auditors.  However, this cannot substitute bank’s basic minimum own  diligence in the matter.
34. Reinforcement of  Regulatory Instructions
34.1 In terms of circular DBOD.No.CAS(COD)BC.142/WGCC-80 December 8, 1980  on ‘Report of the Working Group to Review the System of Cash Credit –  Implementation’, banks were advised that before opening current  accounts/sanctioning post sale limits, they should obtain the concurrence of  the main bankers and/or the banks which have sanctioned inventory limits. Such  accounts already opened may also be reviewed in the light of these instructions  and appropriate action should be taken. Further, in terms of Master Circular DBOD.No.Dir.BC.12/13.03.00/2013-14 dated July 1,  2013 on ‘Guarantees and Co-Acceptances’, banks should refrain from issuing guarantees on behalf of customers who  do not enjoy credit facilities with them.
34.2 RBI reiterates the above instructions regarding  restrictions placed on banks on extending credit facilities including non-fund  based limits, opening of current accounts, etc. to constituents who are not  their regular borrowers. Banks must take necessary corrective action in case  the above instructions have not been strictly followed. Further, RBI will  ensure strict adherence by banks to these instructions. As non-compliance of  RBI regulations in this regard is likely to vitiate credit discipline, RBI will  consider penalising non-compliant banks.
34.3 Banks are custodians  of public deposits and are therefore expected to make all efforts to protect  the value of their assets. Banks are required to extinguish all available means  of recovery before writing off any account fully or partly. It is observed that  some banks are resorting to technical write off of accounts, which reduces  incentives to recover. Banks resorting to partial and technical write-offs  should not show the remaining part of the loan as standard asset. With a view  to bring in more transparency, henceforth banks should disclose full details of  write offs, including separate details about technical write offs, in their  annual financial statements as per the format prescribed in the Appendix to  this part of the Master Circular.
35. Registration of  Transactions with CERSAI
Currently security  registration, especially registration of mortgages, is done at district level  and Central Registry of Securitisation Asset Reconstruction and Security  Interest of India (CERSAI) is generally used to register equitable mortgages.  The Government mandate to register all types of mortgages with CERSAI will have  to be strictly followed by banks. In this connection, instructions contained in  our
circular  DBOD.Leg.No.BC.86/09.08.011/2010-11  dated April 21, 2011
on ‘Setting up of Central Electronic Registry under the  Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of  Security Interest Act 2002’ is reiterated, i.e. transactions relating to  securitization and reconstruction of financial assets and those relating to  mortgage by deposit of title deeds to secure any loan or advances granted by  banks and financial institutions, as defined under the SARFAESI Act, are to be  registered in the Central Registry.
36.  Board Oversight
36.1 The Board of Directors  of banks should take all necessary steps to arrest the deteriorating asset  quality in their books and should focus on improving the credit risk management  system. Early recognition of problems in asset quality and resolution envisaged  in these guidelines requires the lenders to be proactive and make use of CRILC  as soon as it becomes functional.
36.2 Boards of banks should  put in place a policy for timely submission of credit information to CRILC and  accessing information therefrom, prompt formation of Joint Lenders’ Forums  (JLFs), monitoring the progress of JLFs and adoption of Corrective Action Plans  (CAPs), etc. There should be a periodical review, say on a half yearly basis,  of the above policy.
36.3 The boards of banks  should put in place a system for proper and timely classification of borrowers  as wilful defaulters or/and non-cooperative borrowers. Further, Boards of banks  should periodically review the accounts classified as such, say on a half  yearly basis.
Appendix Part C-2
Disclosure of Write-Offs & Technical  Write-Offs
Instructions contained in our
circular  DBOD.BP.BC.No. 79/21.04.018/2009-10 dated March 15, 2010
on ‘Additional  Disclosures by banks in Notes to Accounts’ specifically require banks to  disclose the amounts written off during the year while giving details of  movement in non-performing assets (NPAs). The format specified in the said  circular stands modified as under.
(Amount in Rs. crore)
Particulars
Current year
Previous year
Gross NPAs
8
as on 1st    April of particular year (Opening Balance)
Additions (Fresh NPAs) during the year
Sub-total (A)
Less:-
(i) Upgradations
(ii) Recoveries (excluding recoveries made from upgraded accounts)
(iii) Technical/ Prudential
9
Write-offs
(iv) Write-offs other than those under (iii) above
Sub-total (B)
Gross NPAs as on 31st March of following year (closing balance) (A-B)
Further banks should disclose the stock of  technical write-offs and the recoveries made thereon as per the format below:
(Amount in Rs. crore)
Particulars
Current year
Previous year
Opening balance of Technical/ Prudential written-off accounts as at April    1
Add: Technical/ Prudential write-offs during the year
Sub-total (A)
Less: Recoveries made from previously technical/ prudential written-off    accounts during the year (B)
Closing balance as at March 31 (A-B)
Annex – 1
(Cf.  para 3.5)
Part A
Details of Gross Advances,  Gross NPAs, Net Advances and Net NPAs
(Rs. in Crore up to two decimals)
Particulars
Amount
1.
Standard Advances
2.
Gross NPAs*
3.
Gross Advances** (1 + 2)
4.
Gross NPAs as a percentage of Gross    Advances (2/3) (in %)
5.
Deductions
(i)
Provisions held in the case of NPA Accounts    as per asset classification (including additional Provisions for NPAs at    higher than prescribed rates).
(ii)
DICGC / ECGC claims received and held    pending adjustment
(iii)
Part payment received and kept in Suspense    Account or any other similar account
(iv)
Balance in Sundries Account (Interest    Capitalization - Restructured Accounts), in respect of NPA Accounts
(v)
Floating Provisions***
(vi)
Provisions in lieu of diminution in the    fair value of restructured accounts classified as NPAs
(vii)
Provisions in lieu of diminution in the    fair value of restructured accounts classified as standard assets
6.
Net Advances(3-5)
7.
Net NPAs {2-5(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi)}
8.
Net NPAs as percentage of Net Advances    (7/6) (in %)
*
Principal dues of NPAs plus Funded Interest    Term Loan (FITL) where the corresponding contra credit is parked in Sundries    Account (Interest Capitalization - Restructured Accounts), in respect of NPA    Accounts.
**
For the purpose of this Statement, ‘Gross    Advances' mean all outstanding loans and advances including advances for    which refinance has been received but excluding rediscounted bills, and    advances written off at Head Office level (Technical write off).
***
Floating Provisions would be deducted while    calculating Net NPAs, to the extent, banks have exercised this option, over    utilising it towards Tier II capital.
Part B
Supplementary Details
(Rs. in Crore up to two decimals)
Particulars
Amount
1.
Provisions on Standard Assets excluding    5(vi) in Part A above
2.
Interest recorded as Memorandum Item
3.
Amount of cumulative Technical Write - Off    in respect of NPA accounts reported in Part A above
Annex - 2
(Cf. para 4.2.13)
Relevant extract of the list of direct agricultural  advances, from the Circular Priority Sector Lending – Targets and  Classification - paragraph III (1.1) of RPCD.CO.Plan. BC.9/04.09.01/2013-14  dated July 1, 2013
Direct Agriculture
A. Loans to individual farmers [including Self  Help Groups (SHGs) or Joint Liability Groups (JLGs), i.e. groups of individual  farmers, provided banks maintain disaggregated data on such loans] engaged in  Agriculture only.
(i) Short-term  loans to farmers for raising crops, i.e. for crop loans. This will include  traditional / non-traditional plantations and horticulture.
(ii) Medium &  long-term loans to farmers for agriculture (e.g. purchase of agricultural  implements and machinery, loans for irrigation and other developmental  activities undertaken in the farm).
(iii) Loans to  farmers for pre-harvest and post-harvest activities, viz., spraying, weeding,  harvesting, sorting, grading and transporting of their own farm produce.
(iv)  Loans to farmers up to
`
50 lakh against pledge / hypothecation of  agricultural produce (including warehouse receipts) for a period not exceeding  12 months, irrespective of whether the farmers were given crop loans for raising  the produce or not. (as amended by RPCD.CO.Plan.BC.72/04.09.01/2012-13 dt  03-05-13)
(v) Loans to small  and marginal farmers for purchase of land for agricultural purposes.
(vi) Loans to  distressed farmers indebted to non-institutional lenders.
(vii) Bank loans  to Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS), Farmers' Service Societies  (FSS) and Large-sized Adivasi Multi Purpose Societies (LAMPS) ceded to or  managed / controlled by such banks for on lending to farmers for agricultural  activities.
(viii) Loans to  farmers under Kisan Credit Card Scheme.
(ix) Export credit to farmers for exporting their own  farm produce.
B. Loans to corporates including farmers'  producer companies of individual farmers, partnership firms and co-operatives  of farmers directly engaged in Agriculture Activities, up to an aggregate limit  of
`
2 crore per borrower for the following purposes.
(i) Short-term  loans for raising crops, i.e. for crop loans. This will include traditional /  non-traditional plantations and horticulture.
(ii) Medium &  long-term loans for agriculture (e.g. purchase of agricultural implements and  machinery, loans for irrigation and other developmental activities undertaken  in the farm).
(iii) Loans for  pre-harvest and post-harvest activities, viz., spraying, weeding, harvesting,  grading and sorting.
(iv) Export credit for exporting their own farm  produce.
Annex – 3
Format for Computing Countercyclical  Provisioning Buffer
Amount in Rs. in Crore
Computing    Countercyclical Provisioning Buffer as on September 30, 2010
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Gross
NPA @ Plus
Tech
nical / Prud
ential Write-off *
Specific Provisions
for NPAs held /
required
Provisions for    diminution in fair value of the restructured accounts calssified as NPAs
Technical write-off
Total
(4+5+6)
Ratio of (7) to (3)
1.
Sub-Standard    Advances
2.
Doubtful    Advances (a+b+c)
a
<    1 year
b
1-3    Years
c
>3    years
3.
Advances    classified as Loss Assets
4.
Total
5.
Floating    Provisions for Advances (only to the extent they are not used as Tier II    Capital)
6.
DICGC    / ECGC claims received and held pending    adjustment
7.
Part    payment received and kept in Suspense Account or any other similar account
8.
Total
(Sum of column 7 of Row 4+ Row 5 + Row 6+ Row 7)
9.
Provision Coverage Ratio
{(Row 8/Total of Column 3 of Row    4)*100}
10.
If    PCR < 70%, shortfall in provisioning to achieve PCR of 70% (70% of Column    3 of Row 4 - Row 8)
11.
a
Countercyclical Provisioning Buffer, if bank has achieved PCR of    70% - Floating    Provisions for advances to the extent not used as Tier II capital (Row 5)
b
Countercyclical Provisioning Buffer, if bank has not achieved    PCR of 70% - Floating    Provisions for advances to the extent not used as Tier II capital (Row 5)    +  Shortfall in provisioning to achieve PCR of 70%, if any (Row 10)    which needs to be built up at the earliest.
Annex - 4
Organisational Framework for Restructuring of Advances Under Consortium / Multiple Banking / Syndication Arrangements
A.
Corporate Debt Restructuring (CDR) Mechanism
1.1 Objective
The  objective of the Corporate Debt Restructuring (CDR) framework is to ensure  timely and transparent mechanism for restructuring the corporate debts of  viable entities facing problems, outside the purview of BIFR, DRT and other  legal proceedings, for the benefit of all concerned. In particular, the  framework will aim at preserving viable corporates that are affected by certain  internal and external factors and minimize the losses to the creditors and  other stakeholders through an orderly and coordinated restructuring programme.
1.2 Scope
The  CDR Mechanism has been designed to facilitate restructuring of advances of  borrowers enjoying credit facilities from more than one bank / Financial  Institution (FI) in a coordinated manner. The CDR Mechanism is an  organizational framework institutionalized for speedy disposal of restructuring  proposals of large borrowers availing finance from more than one banks / FIs.  This mechanism will be available to all borrowers engaged in any type of  activity subject to the following conditions:
a) The  borrowers enjoy credit facilities from more than one bank / FI under multiple  banking / syndication / consortium system of lending.
b) The  total outstanding (fund-based and non-fund based) exposure is Rs.10 crore or  above.
CDR  system in the country will have a three tier structure :
CDR Standing Forum and       its Core Group
CDR Empowered Group
CDR Cell
2. CDR Standing Forum
2.1 The  CDR Standing Forum would be the representative general body of all financial  institutions and banks participating in CDR system. All financial institutions  and banks should participate in the system in their own interest. CDR Standing  Forum will be a selfempowered body, which will lay down policies and  guidelines, and monitor the progress of corporate debt restructuring.
2.2 The  Forum will also provide an official platform for both the creditors and  borrowers (by consultation) to amicably and collectively evolve policies and  guidelines for working out debt restructuring plans in the interests of all  concerned.
2.3 The  CDR Standing Forum shall comprise of Chairman & Managing Director,  Industrial Development Bank of India Ltd; Chairman, State Bank of India;  Managing Director & CEO, ICICI Bank Limited; Chairman, Indian Banks'  Association as well as Chairmen and Managing Directors of all banks and  financial institutions participating as permanent members in the system. Since  institutions like Unit Trust of India, General Insurance Corporation, Life  Insurance Corporation may have assumed exposures on certain borrowers, these  institutions may participate in the CDR system. The Forum will elect its  Chairman for a period of one year and the principle of rotation will be  followed in the subsequent years. However, the Forum may decide to have a  Working Chairman as a whole-time officer to guide and carry out the decisions  of the CDR Standing Forum. The RBI would not be a member of the CDR Standing  Forum and Core Group. Its role will be confined to providing broad guidelines.
2.4 The  CDR Standing Forum shall meet at least once every six months and would review  and monitor the progress of corporate debt restructuring system. The Forum would  also lay down the policies and guidelines including those relating to the  critical parameters for restructuring (for example, maximum period for a unit  to become viable under a restructuring package, minimum level of promoters'  sacrifice etc.) to be followed by the CDR Empowered Group and CDR Cell for debt  restructuring and would ensure their smooth functioning and adherence to the  prescribed time schedules for debt restructuring. It can also review any  individual decisions of the CDR Empowered Group and CDR Cell. The CDR Standing  Forum may also formulate guidelines for dispensing special treatment  to those cases, which are complicated and are likely to be delayed beyond the  time frame prescribed for processing.
2.5 A CDR  Core Group will be carved out of the CDR Standing Forum to assist the Standing  Forum in convening the meetings and taking decisions relating to policy, on  behalf of the Standing Forum. The Core Group will consist of Chief Executives  of Industrial Development Bank of India Ltd., State Bank of India, ICICI Bank  Ltd, Bank of Baroda, Bank of India, Punjab National Bank, Indian Banks'  Association and Deputy Chairman of Indian Banks' Association representing  foreign banks in India.
2.6 The  CDR Core Group would lay down the policies and guidelines to be followed by the  CDR Empowered Group and CDR Cell for debt restructuring. These guidelines shall  also suitably address the operational difficulties experienced in the  functioning of the CDR Empowered Group. The CDR Core Group shall also prescribe  the PERT chart for processing of cases referred to the CDR system and decide on  the modalities for enforcement of the time frame. The CDR Core Group shall also  lay down guidelines to ensure that over-optimistic projections are not assumed  while preparing / approving restructuring proposals especially with regard to  capacity utilization, price of products, profit margin, demand, availability of  raw materials, input-output ratio and likely impact of imports / international  cost competitiveness.
3. CDR Empowered Group
3.1 The  individual cases of corporate debt restructuring shall be decided by the CDR  Empowered Group, consisting of ED level representatives of Industrial  Development Bank of India Ltd., ICICI Bank Ltd. and State Bank of India as  standing members, in addition to ED level representatives of financial  institutions and banks who have an exposure to the concerned company. While the  standing members will facilitate the conduct of the Group's meetings, voting  will be in proportion to the exposure of the creditors only. In order to make  the CDR Empowered Group effective and broad based and operate efficiently and  smoothly, it would have to be ensured that participating institutions / banks  approve a panel of senior officers to represent them in the CDR Empowered Group  and ensure that they depute officials only from among the panel to attend the  meetings of CDR Empowered Group. Further, nominees who attend the meeting  pertaining to one account should invariably attend all the meetings pertaining  to that account instead of deputing their representatives.
3.2 The  level of representation of banks / financial institutions on the CDR Empowered  Group should be at a sufficiently senior level to ensure that concerned bank /  FI abides by the necessary commitments including sacrifices, made towards debt  restructuring. There should be a general authorisation by the respective Boards  of the participating institutions / banks in favour of their representatives on  the CDR Empowered Group, authorising them to take decisions on behalf of their  organization, regarding restructuring of debts of individual corporates.
3.3 The  CDR Empowered Group will consider the preliminary report of all cases of  requests of restructuring, submitted to it by the CDR Cell. After the Empowered  Group decides that restructuring of the company is prima-facie feasible and the  enterprise is potentially viable in terms of the policies and guidelines  evolved by Standing Forum, the detailed restructuring package will be worked  out by the CDR Cell in conjunction with the Lead Institution. However, if the  lead institution faces difficulties in working out the detailed restructuring  package, the participating banks / financial institutions should decide upon  the alternate institution / bank which would work out the detailed  restructuring package at the first meeting of the Empowered Group when the  preliminary report of the CDR Cell comes up for consideration.
3.4 The  CDR Empowered Group would be mandated to look into each case of debt  restructuring, examine the viability and rehabilitation potential of the  Company and approve the restructuring package within a specified time frame of  90 days, or at best within 180 days of reference to the Empowered Group. The  CDR Empowered Group shall decide on the acceptable viability benchmark levels  on the following illustrative parameters, which may be applied on a  case-by-case basis, based on the merits of each case:
* Return  on Capital Employed (ROCE),
* Debt  Service Coverage Ratio (DSCR),
* Gap  between the Internal Rate of Return (IRR) and the Cost of Fund (CoF),
* Extent  of sacrifice.
3.5 The  Board of each bank / FI should authorise its Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and  / or Executive Director (ED) to decide on the restructuring package in respect  of cases referred to the CDR system, with the requisite requirements to meet  the control needs. CDR Empowered Group will meet on two or three occasions in  respect of each borrowal account. This will provide an opportunity to the  participating members to seek proper authorisations from their CEO / ED, in  case of need, in respect of those cases where the critical parameters of  restructuring are beyond the authority delegated to him / her.
3.6 The  decisions of the CDR Empowered Group shall be final. If restructuring of debt  is found to be viable and feasible and approved by the Empowered Group, the  company would be put on the restructuring mode. If restructuring is not found  viable, the creditors would then be free to take necessary steps for immediate  recovery of dues and / or liquidation or winding up of the company,  collectively or individually.
4. CDR Cell
4.1 The  CDR Standing Forum and the CDR Empowered Group will be assisted by a CDR Cell  in all their functions. The CDR Cell will make the initial scrutiny of the  proposals received from borrowers / creditors, by calling for proposed  rehabilitation plan and other information and put up the matter before the CDR  Empowered Group, within one month to decide whether rehabilitation is prima  facie feasible. If found feasible, the CDR Cell will proceed to prepare  detailed Rehabilitation Plan with the help of creditors and, if necessary,  experts to be engaged from outside. If not found prima facie feasible, the  creditors may start action for recovery of their dues.
4.2 All  references for corporate debt restructuring by creditors or borrowers will be  made to the CDR Cell. It shall be the responsibility of the lead institution /  major stakeholder to the corporate, to work out a preliminary restructuring  plan in consultation with other stakeholders and submit to the CDR Cell within  one month. The CDR Cell will prepare the restructuring plan in terms of the  general policies and guidelines approved by the CDR Standing Forum and place  for consideration of the Empowered Group within 30 days for decision. The  Empowered Group can approve or suggest modifications but ensure that a final  decision is taken within a total period of 90 days. However, for sufficient  reasons the period can be extended up to a maximum of 180 days from the date of  reference to the CDR Cell.
4.3 The  CDR Standing Forum, the CDR Empowered Group and CDR Cell is at present housed  in Industrial Development Bank of India Ltd. However, it may be shifted to  another place if considered necessary, as may be decided by the Standing Forum.  The administrative and other costs shall be shared by all financial  institutions and banks. The sharing pattern shall be as determined by the  Standing Forum.
4.4 CDR  Cell will have adequate members of staff deputed from banks and financial  institutions. The CDR Cell may also take outside professional help. The cost in  operating the CDR mechanism including CDR Cell will be met from contribution of  the financial institutions and banks in the Core Group at the rate of Rs.50 lakh  each and contribution from other institutions and banks at the rate of Rs.5  lakh each.
5. Other features
5.1 Eligibility criteria
5.1.1 The  scheme will not apply to accounts involving only one financial institution or  one bank. The CDR mechanism will cover only multiple banking accounts /  syndication / consortium accounts of corporate borrowers engaged in any type of  activity with outstanding fund-based and non-fund based exposure of Rs.10 crore  and above by banks and institutions.
5.1.2 The Category  1 CDR system will be applicable only to accounts classified as 'standard' and  'sub-standard'. There may be a situation where a small portion of debt by a  bank might be classified as doubtful. In that situation, if the account has  been classified as 'standard'/ 'substandard' in the books of at least 90% of  creditors (by value), the same would be treated as standard / substandard, only  for the purpose of judging the account as eligible for CDR, in the books of the  remaining 10% of creditors. There would be no requirement of the account /  company being sick, NPA or being in default for a specified period before  reference to the CDR system. However, potentially viable cases of NPAs will get  priority. This approach would provide the necessary flexibility and facilitate  timely intervention for debt restructuring. Prescribing any milestone(s) may  not be necessary, since the debt restructuring exercise is being triggered by  banks and financial institutions or with their consent.
5.1.3 While  corporates indulging in frauds and malfeasance even in a single bank will  continue to remain ineligible for restructuring under CDR mechanism as  hitherto, the Core group may review the reasons for classification of the  borrower as wilful defaulter specially in old cases where the manner of  classification of a borrower as a wilful defaulter was not transparent and  satisfy itself that the borrower is in a position to rectify the wilful default  provided he is granted an opportunity under the CDR mechanism. Such exceptional  cases may be admitted for restructuring with the approval of the Core Group  only. The Core Group may ensure that cases involving frauds or diversion of  funds with malafide intent are not covered.
5.1.4 The  accounts where recovery suits have been filed by the creditors against the  company, may be eligible for consideration under the CDR system provided, the  initiative to resolve the case under the CDR system is taken by at least 75% of  the creditors (by value) and 60% of creditors (by number).
5.1.5 BIFR  cases are not eligible for restructuring under the CDR system. However, large  value BIFR cases may be eligible for restructuring under the CDR system if  specifically recommended by the CDR Core Group. The Core Group shall recommend  exceptional BIFR cases on a case-to-case basis for consideration under the CDR  system. It should be ensured that the lending institutions complete all the  formalities in seeking the approval from BIFR before implementing the package.
5.2 Reference to CDR system
5.2.1 Reference  to Corporate Debt Restructuring System could be triggered by (i) any or more of  the creditor who have minimum 20% share in either working capital or term  finance, or (ii) by the concerned corporate, if supported by a bank or  financial institution having stake as in (i) above.
5.2.2 Though  flexibility is available whereby the creditors could either consider  restructuring outside the purview of the CDR system or even initiate legal  proceedings where warranted, banks / FIs should review all eligible cases where  the exposure of the financial system is more than Rs.100 crore and decide about  referring the case to CDR system or to proceed under the new Securitisation and  Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Securities Interest Act,  2002 or to file a suit in DRT etc.
5.3 Legal Basis
5.3.1 CDR is  a non-statutory mechanism which is a voluntary system based on Debtor- Creditor  Agreement (DCA) and Inter-Creditor Agreement (ICA). The Debtor-Creditor  Agreement (DCA) and the Inter-Creditor Agreement (ICA) shall provide the legal  basis to the CDR mechanism. The debtors shall have to accede to the DCA, either  at the time of original loan documentation (for future cases) or at the time of  reference to Corporate Debt Restructuring Cell. Similarly, all participants in  the CDR mechanism through their membership of the Standing Forum shall have to  enter into a legally binding agreement, with necessary enforcement and penal  clauses, to operate the System through laid-down policies and guidelines. The ICA  signed by the creditors will be initially valid for a period of 3 years and  subject to renewal for further periods of 3 years thereafter. The lenders in  foreign currency outside the country are not a part of CDR system. Such  creditors and also creditors like GIC, LIC, UTI, etc., who have not joined the  CDR system, could join CDR mechanism of a particular corporate by signing  transaction to transaction ICA, wherever they have exposure to such corporate.
5.3.2 The  Inter-Creditor Agreement would be a legally binding agreement amongst the  creditors, with necessary enforcement and penal clauses, wherein the creditors  would commit themselves to abide by the various elements of CDR system.  Further, the creditors shall agree that if 75 per cent of creditors by value  and 60 per cent of the creditors by number, agree to a restructuring package of  an existing debt (i.e., debt outstanding), the same would be binding on the  remaining creditors. Since Category 1 CDR Scheme covers only standard and  sub-standard accounts, which in the opinion of 75 per cent of the creditors by  value and 60 per cent of creditors by number, are likely to become performing  after introduction of the CDR package, it is expected that all other creditors  (i.e., those outside the minimum 75 per cent by value and 60 per cent by  number) would be willing to participate in the entire CDR package, including  the agreed additional financing.
5.3.3 In  order to improve effectiveness of the CDR mechanism a clause may be  incorporated in the loan agreements involving consortium / syndicate accounts  whereby all creditors, including those which are not members of the CDR  mechanism, agree to be bound by the terms of the restructuring package that may  be approved under the CDR mechanism, as and when restructuring may become  necessary.
5.3.4 One of  the most important elements of Debtor-Creditor Agreement would be 'stand still'  agreement binding for 90 days, or 180 days by both sides. Under this clause,  both the debtor and creditor(s) shall agree to a legally binding 'stand-still'  whereby both the parties commit themselves not to take recourse to any other  legal action during the 'stand-still' period, this would be necessary for  enabling the CDR System to undertake the necessary debt restructuring exercise  without any outside intervention, judicial or otherwise. However, the  stand-still clause will be applicable only to any civil action either by the  borrower or any lender against the other party and will not cover any criminal  action. Further, during the stand-still period, outstanding foreign exchange  forward contracts, derivative products, etc., can be crystallised, provided the  borrower is agreeable to such crystallisation. The borrower will additionally  undertake that during the stand-still period the documents will stand extended  for the purpose of limitation and also that it will not approach any other  authority for any relief and the directors of the borrowing company will not  resign from the Board of Directors during the stand-still period.
5.4 Sharing of Additional finance
5.4.1 Additional  finance, if any, is to be provided by all creditors of a 'standard' or  'substandard account' irrespective of whether they are working capital or term  creditors, on a pro-rata basis. In case for any internal reason, any creditor  (outside the minimum 75 per cent and 60 per cent) does not wish to commit  additional financing, that creditor will have an option in accordance with the  provisions of para 5.5.
5.4.2 The  providers of additional finance, whether existing creditors or new creditors,  shall have a preferential claim, to be worked out under the restructuring  package, over the providers of existing finance with respect to the cash flows  out of recoveries, in respect of the additional exposure
5.5 Exit Option
5.5.1 As  stated in para 5.4.1 a creditor  (outside the minimum 75 per cent and 60 per cent) who for any internal reason  does not wish to commit additional finance will have an option. At the same  time, in order to avoid the "free rider" problem, it is necessary to  provide some disincentive to the creditor who wishes to exercise this option.  Such creditors can either (a) arrange for its share of additional finance to be  provided by a new or existing creditor, or (b) agree to the deferment of the  first year's interest due to it after the CDR package becomes effective. The  first year's deferred interest as mentioned above, without compounding, will be  payable along with the last instalment of the principal due to the creditor.
5.5.2 In  addition, the exit option will also be available to all lenders within the  minimum 75 percent and 60 percent provided the purchaser agrees to abide by  restructuring package approved by the Empowered Group. The exiting lenders may  be allowed to continue with their existing level of exposure to the borrower  provided they tie up with either the existing lenders or fresh lenders taking  up their share of additional finance.
5.5.3 The  lenders who wish to exit from the package would have the option to sell their  existing share to either the existing lenders or fresh lenders, at an  appropriate price, which would be decided mutually between the exiting lender  and the taking over lender. The new lenders shall rank on par with the existing  lenders for repayment and servicing of the dues since they have taken over the  existing dues to the exiting lender.
5.5.4 In  order to bring more flexibility in the exit option, One Time Settlement can  also be considered, wherever necessary, as a part of the restructuring package.  If an account with any creditor is subjected to One Time Settlement (OTS) by a  borrower before its reference to the CDR mechanism, any fulfilled commitments  under such OTS may not be reversed under the restructured package. Further  payment commitments of the borrower arising out of such OTS may be factored  into the restructuring package.
5.6 Category 2 CDR System
5.6.1 There  have been instances where the projects have been found to be viable by the  creditors but the accounts could not be taken up for restructuring under the  CDR system as they fell under 'doubtful' category. Hence, a second category of  CDR is introduced for cases where the accounts have been classified as  'doubtful' in the books of creditors, and if a minimum of 75% of creditors (by  value) and 60% creditors (by number) satisfy themselves of the viability of the  account and consent for such restructuring, subject to the following conditions:
(i) It  will not be binding on the creditors to take up additional financing worked out  under the debt restructuring package and the decision to lend or not to lend  will depend on each creditor bank / FI separately. In other words, under the  proposed second category of the CDR mechanism, the existing loans will only be  restructured and it would be up to the promoter to firm up additional financing  arrangement with new or existing creditors individually.
(ii) All  other norms under the CDR mechanism such as the standstill clause, asset  classification status during the pendency of restructuring under CDR, etc.,  will continue to be applicable to this category also.
5.6.2 No  individual case should be referred to RBI. CDR Core Group may take a final  decision whether a particular case falls under the CDR guidelines or it does  not.
5.6.3 All  the other features of the CDR system as applicable to the First Category will  also be applicable to cases restructured under the Second Category.
5.7 Incorporation of 'right to recompense' clause
All  CDR approved packages must incorporate creditors' right to accelerate repayment  and borrowers' right to pre-pay. All restructuring packages must incorporate  ‘Right to recompense’ clause and it should be based on certain performance  criteria of the borrower. In any case, minimum 75 per cent of the recompense  amount should be recovered by the lenders and in cases where some facility  under restructuring has been extended below base rate, 100 per cent of the  recompense amount should be recovered.
B
SME Debt Restructuring Mechanism
Apart  from CDR Mechanism, there exists a much simpler mechanism for restructuring of  loans availed by Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs). Unlike in the case of CDR  Mechanism, the operational rules of the mechanism have been left to be  formulated by the banks concerned. This mechanism will be applicable to all the  borrowers which have funded and non-funded outstanding up to Rs.10 crore under  multiple /consortium banking arrangement. Major elements of this arrangements  are as under:
(i) Under  this mechanism, banks may formulate, with the approval of their Board of  Directors, a debt restructuring scheme for SMEs within the prudential norms  laid down by RBI. Banks may frame different sets of policies for borrowers  belonging to different sectors within the SME if they so desire.
(ii) While  framing the scheme, banks may ensure that the scheme is simple to comprehend  and will, at the minimum, include parameters indicated in these guidelines.
(iii) The  main plank of the scheme is that the bank with the maximum outstanding may work  out the restructuring package, along with the bank having the second largest  share.
(iv) Banks  should work out the restructuring package and implement the same within a  maximum period of 90 days from date of receipt of requests.
(v) The  SME Debt Restructuring Mechanism will be available to all borrowers engaged in  any type of activity.
(vi) Banks  may review the progress in rehabilitation and restructuring of SMEs accounts on  a quarterly basis and keep the Board informed.
Annex - 5
Key Concepts
(i)
Advances
The term  'Advances' will mean all kinds of credit facilities including cash credit,  overdrafts, term loans, bills discounted / purchased, factored receivables,  etc. and investments other than that in the nature of equity.
(ii) Agricultural Activities
As  defined in RPCD
circular RPCD.No.Plan.BC.84/04.09.01/2006-07 dated April  30, 2007
as modified from time to time.
(iii) Fully Secured
When  the amounts due to a bank (present value of principal and interest receivable  as per restructured loan terms) are fully covered by the value of security,  duly charged in its favour in respect of those dues, the bank's dues are  considered to be fully secured. While assessing the realisable value of  security, primary as well as collateral securities would be reckoned, provided  such securities are tangible securities and are not in intangible form like  guarantee etc., of the promoter / others. However, for this purpose the bank  guarantees, State Government Guarantees and Central Government Guarantees will  be treated on par with tangible security.
(iv) Restructured Accounts
A restructured account is one where the bank,  for economic or legal reasons relating to the borrower's financial difficulty,  grants to the borrower concessions that the bank would not otherwise consider.  Restructuring would normally involve modification of terms of the advances /  securities, which would generally include, among others, alteration of  repayment period / repayable amount/ the amount of instalments / rate of  interest (due to reasons other than competitive reasons). However, extension in  repayment tenor of a floating rate loan on reset of interest rate, so as to  keep the EMI unchanged provided it is applied to a class of accounts uniformly  will not render the account to be classified as ‘Restructured account’. In  other words, extension or deferment of EMIs to individual borrowers as against  to an entire class, would render the accounts to be classified as 'restructured  accounts’.
In the cases of roll-over of short term loans,  where proper pre-sanction assessment has been made, and the roll-over is  allowed based on the actual requirement of the borrower and no concession has  been provided due to credit weakness of the borrower, then these might not be  considered as restructured accounts. However, if such accounts are rolled-over  more than two times, then third roll-over onwards the account would have to be  treated as a restructured account. Besides, banks should be circumspect while  granting such facilities as the borrower may be availing similar facilities  from other banks in the consortium or under multiple banking. Further, Short  Term Loans for the purpose of this provision do not include properly assessed  regular Working Capital Loans like revolving Cash Credit or Working Capital  Demand Loans.
(v) Repeatedly Restructured Accounts
When a  bank restructures an account a second (or more) time(s), the account will be  considered as a 'repeatedly restructured account'. However, if the second  restructuring takes place after the period upto which the concessions were  extended under the terms of the first restructuring, that account shall not be  reckoned as a 'repeatedly restructured account'.
(vi) SMEs
Small  and Medium Enterprise (SME) is an undertaking defined in RPCD
circulars  RPCD.PLNFS.BC.No.63.06.02/2006-07 dated April 4, 2007
amended from time to  time.
(vii) Specified Period
Specified  Period means a period of one year from the commencement of the first  payment of interest or principal,
whichever is later
, on the credit  facility with longest period of moratorium under the terms of restructuring package.
(viii) Satisfactory Performance
Satisfactory  performance during the specified period means adherence to the following  conditions during that period.
Non-Agricultural Cash Credit Accounts
In the  case of non-agricultural cash credit accounts, the account should not be out of  order any time during the specified period, for a duration of more than 90  days. In addition, there should not be any overdues at the end of the specified  period.
Non-Agricultural Term Loan Accounts
In the  case of non-agricultural term loan accounts, no payment should remain overdue  for a period of more than 90 days. In addition there should not be any overdues  at the end of the specified period.
All Agricultural Accounts
In the  case of agricultural accounts, at the end of the specified period the account  should be regular.
*Note: It is observed that in a rising interest  rate scenario, banks normally extend the repayment period by keeping the EMI  constant. However, in a few cases this resulted in extending the repayment  period much beyond the retirement age or the revenue generating capacity of the  borrower. Therefore, it is advised that:
(i)  While extending repayment period in respect of housing loans to keep the EMI  unchanged, banks should satisfy themselves about the revenue generation /  repaying capacity of the borrower during the entire repayment period including  the extended repayment period.
(ii)  Banks should not extend the repayment period of such borrowers where they have  concerns regarding the repaying capacity over the extended period, even if the  borrowers want to extend the tenor to keep the EMI unchanged.
(iii) Banks should provide the option of higher EMI to  such borrowers who want to repay the housing loan as per the original repayment  period.
Annex - 7
(Cf. para 2 of the covering letter to the circular)
List of Circulars consolidated by the Master Circular  on IRAC Norms
Sl.
No.
Circular    No.
Date
Subject
Para    No. of the MC
1
DBOD.No.BP.BC.125/21.04.048/2013-14
26.06.2014
Prudential Norms on Income Recognition,    Asset Classification and Provisioning Pertaining to Advances - Projects under    Implementation
4.2.15.5 (iv) and (v)
2
Mailbox    Clarification
11.04.2014
Prudential    Norms for Conversion of Unpaid Interest into
'Funded Interest Term Loan' (FITL), Debt or Equity Instruments
14.2.5
3
Mailbox    Clarification
09.04.2014
Framework for    Revitalising Distressed Assets in the Economy – Refinancing of Project Loans,    Sale of NPAs and Other Regulatory Measures
6.5 (A) (a) (iii)
4
DBOD.No.BP.BC.98/21.04.132/2013-14
26.02.2014
Framework for    Revitalising Distressed Assets in the Economy – Refinancing of Project Loans,    Sale of NPAs and Other Regulatory Measures
6.3 (iii)
6.4 (d) (iv)
6.5 (A) (a) (ii) and (iii)
7.3 (ix)
7.3 (x)
Part C-2
5
DBOD.No.BP.BC.97/21.04.132/2013-14
26.02.2014
Framework for    Revitalising Distressed Assets in the Economy – Guidelines on Joint Lenders    Forum (JLF) and Corrective Action Plan
Part C - 1
6
DBOD.No.BP.BC.95/21.04.048/2013-14
7.02.2014
Utilisation of    Floating Provisions / Counter Cyclical Provisioning Buffer
5.10 (iii) (c)
5.10 (v)
7
DBOD.No.BP.BC.85/21.06.200/2013-14
15.01.2014
Capital and    Provisioning Requirements for Exposures to entities with Unhedged Foreign    Currency Exposures
5.5 (vi)
8
DBOD.No.BP.BC.78/21.04.048/2013-14
20.12.2013
Prudential Norms    on Income Recognition, Asset Classification and Provisioning pertaining to    Advances – Credit Card Accounts
4.2.21
9
DBOD.BP.BC.No.    104/08.12.015/2012-13
21.06.2013
Housing Sector: New sub-sector CRE (Residential    Housing) within CRE & Rationalisation of provisioning, risk-weight and    LTV ratios
5.5 (c)
10
Mail    Box Clarification
06.06.2013
Review of    Prudential Guidelines on Restructuring of Advances by Banks and Financial    Institutions
4.2.15.3 (iv) 4.2.15.4 (iii)
Part B
11
DBOD.No.BP.BC-99/21.04.048/2012-13
30.05.2013
Review of    Prudential Guidelines on Restructuring of Advances by Banks and Financial    Institutions
4.2.15, Part B, Annex 4 & 5
12
DBOD.No.BP.BC-90/21.04.048/2012-13
16.04.2013
Advances    Guaranteed by Credit Risk Guarantee Fund Trust for Low Income Housing    (CRGFTLIH) – Risk Weights and Provisioning
5.9.5
13
DBOD.No.BP.BC-83/21.04.048/2012-13
18.03.2013
Prudential Norms    on Advances to Infrastructure Sector
5.4 (iii) (c)
14
DBOD.BP.BC.No.80/21.04.132/2012-13
31.01.2013
Disclosure    Requirements on Advances
Restructured by Banks and Financial Institutions
Part B & Annex - 6
15
DBOD.No.BP.BC-63/21.04.048/2012-13
26.11.2012
Review of    Prudential Guidelines on Restructuring of Advances by Banks and Financial    Institutions
4.2.15.3 (iv) 4.2.15.4 (iii)
16
DBOD.No.BP.BC-42/21.04.048/2012-13
14.09.2012
NPA Management –    Requirement of an Effective Mechanism and Granular Data
4.2.21
17
DBOD.No.BP.BC-103/21.04.177/2011-12
07.05.2012
Revisions to the    Guidelines on Securitisation Transactions
4.2.20
18
DBOD.No.BP.BC-28/21.04.157/2011-12
11.08.2011
Prudential Norms for    Off-balance Sheet Exposures of Banks
4.2.7 (d) to (h)
19
DBOD.BP.BC.No.99/21.04.132/2010-11
10.06.2011
Prudential Guidelines on Restructuring of Advances    by Banks
12.4.2
20
DBOD.No.BP.BC.94/21.04.048/2011-12
18.05.2011
Enhancement of Rates of Provisioning for    Non-Performing Assets and Restructured Advances
5.3 (ii), 5.4(i), 5.4(ii) 5.8(i), 5.8(ii), 5.9.14
21
DBOD.No.BP.BC.87/21.04.048/2010-11
21.04.2011
Provisioning Coverage Ratio (PCR) for Advances
5.10
22
DBOD.BP.BC.No.74/21.04.132/2010-11
19.01.2011
Credit Support to Micro Finance Institutions
15.2.2
23
DBOD.No.BP.BC.69/08.12.001/2010-11
23.12.2010
Housing Loans by Commercial Banks – LTV Ratio,    Risk Weight and Provisioning
5.9.13
24
DBOD.BP.No.49/21.04.132/2010-11
07.10.2010
Prudential Guidelines on Restructuring of Advances    by Banks
15.2.2
25
Mail Box Clarification
06.07.2010
Provisioning for Standard Assets – Medium    Enterprises
5.5 (vi)
26
DBOD.No.BP.BC.96/08.12.014/2009-10
23.04.2010
Prudential Norms on Advances to Infrastructure    Sector
5.4 (ii), and 5.4 (iii) (b)
27
DBOD.No.BP.BC.85/21.04.048/2009-10
31.03.2010
Prudential Norms on Income Recognition, Asset    Classification and
Provisioning Pertaining to Advances - Projects    under Implementation
4.2.15
28
DBOD.No.BP.BC.64/21.04.048/2009-10
01.12.2009
Second Quarter Review of Monetary Policy for the
Year 2009-10 - Provisioning Coverage for Advances
5.10,
Annex - 3
29
DBOD.No.BP.BC.58/21.04.048/2009-10
05.11.2009
Second Quarter Review of Monetary Policy for the    Year 2009-10 -
Provisioning Requirement for Standard Assets
5.5 (i)
30
DBOD.No.BP.BC.46/21.04.048/2009-10
24.09.2009
Prudential Norms on Income Recognition, Asset    Classification and
Provisioning pertaining to Advances - Computation    of NPA Levels
3.2, 3.4 3.5, Annex -1
31
DBOD.No.BP.BC.33/21.04.048/2009-10
27.08.2009
Prudential Treatment in respect of Floating    Provisions
5.6.3
32
DBOD.No.BP.BC.125/21.04.048/2008-09
17.04.2009
Prudential    Norms on Unsecured Advances
5.4(iii)
33
DBOD.No.BP.BC.No.124/21.04.132/2008-09
17.04.2009
Prudential    Guidelines on Restructuring of Advances
Annex    - 4
34
DBOD.No.BP.BC.122/21.04.048/2008-09
09/04/2009
Prudential    Treatment in respect of Floating Provisions
5.6.3
35
DBOD.BP.BC.121/21.04.132/2008-09
09.04.2009
Prudential    guidelines on Restructuring of Advances
12.4.2,    17
36
37
DBOD.No.BP.BC.118/21.04.048/2008-09
25/03/2009
Prudential    Treatment of different Types of Provisions in respect of Loan Portfolios
5.6.3,    5.7, 5.9.9, 5.9.10
38
DBOD.BP.BC.83/21.01.002/2008-09
15/11/2008
Review    of Prudential Norms - Provisioning for Standard Assets and Risk Weights for    Exposures to Corporates, Commercial Real Estate and NBFC-ND-SI
5.5
39
DBOD.No.BP.BC.84/21.04.048/2008-09
14/11/2008
Asset    Classification Norms for Infrastructure Projects under Implementation
4.2.15
40
DBOD.BP.BC.76/21.04.132/2008-09
03.11.2008
Prudential    guidelines on Restructuring of Advances
15.2.2
41
DBOD.BP.BC.No.69/21.03.009/2008-09
29/10/2008
Prudential    Norms for Off-Balance Sheet Exposures of Banks
4.2.7    (iv)
42
DBOD.BP.BC.58/21.04.048/2008-09
13.10.2008
(i)    Disbursal of Loans against Sanctioned Limits (ii) Restructuring of Dues of    the Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs)
Annex    - 4
43
DBOD.No.BP.BC.57/21.04.157/2008-09
13/10/2008
Prudential    Norms for Off-balance Sheet Exposures of Banks
2.1.2    (vii), 4.2.7 (iv) to 4.2.7 (vii)
44
DBOD.BP.BC.37/21.04.132/2008-09
27.08.2008
Prudential    guidelines on Restructuring of Advances-comprehensive guidelines
Part    B
45
DBOD.No.BP.BC.31/21.04.157/2008-09
08/08/2008
Prudential    Norms for Off-balance Sheet Exposures of Banks
2.1.2    (vii),
5.9.12
46
DBOD.BP.BC.82/21.04.048/2007-08
08.05.2008
Prudential    Norms on Asset Classification Pertaining to Advances -
Infrastructure    Projects under Implementation and Involving Time Overrun
4.2.15    (iv)
47
DBOD.No.BP.BC.34/21.04.048/2007-08
04.10.2007
Guidelines    on Purchase / Sale of Non Performing Assets
7.3    (iii)
48
DBOD.No.BP.BC.97/21.04.048/2006-07
16.05.2007
Guidelines    on Purchase / Sale of Non Performing Assets
7.3    (iii)
49
DBOD.No.BP.BC.76/21.04.048/2006-07
12.04.2007
Prudential    Norms on Income Recognition, Asset Classification and Provisioning Pertaining    to Advances - Projects Involving Time Overrun
4.2.15    (iv)
50
DBOD.No.BP.BC.68/21.04.048/2006-07
13.03.2007
Prudential    Norms on Creation and Utilisation of Floating Provisions
5.6.2
51
DBOD.No.BP.BC.53/21.04.048/2006-2007
31.01.2007
Third    Quarter Review of the Annual Statement on Monetary Policy for the year    2006-07 - Provisioning Requirement for Standard Assets and Risk Weights for    Capital Adequacy
5.5    (i)
52
DBOD.No.BP.BC.21/21.04.048/2006-2007
12.07.2006
Annual    Policy Statement for the year 2006-07 -
Additional    Provisioning Requirement for Standard Assets
5.5    (i)
53
DBOD.NO.BP.BC.89/21.04.048/2005­-06
22.06.2006
Prudential    norms on creation and utilization of floating provisions
5.6
54
DBOD.NO.BP.BC.85/21.04.048/2005­-06
29.05.2006
Annual    Policy  Statement for the year 2006­-07: Additional Provisioning    Requirement for Standard Assets
5.5(i)
55
DBOD.NO.BP.BC.45/21.0421.04.048/2005-­06
10.11.2005
Revised    Guidelines on Corporate Debt Restructuring(CDR) Mechanism
Part    B
56
DBOD.NO.BP.BC.46/21.0421.04.048/2005-­06
10.11.2005
Debt    restructuring mechanism for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs)
Part    B
57
DBOD.NO.BP.BC.40/21.04.048/2005-­06
04.11.2005
Mid­    Term Review of Annual  Policy     Statement for the year 2005­06: Additional Provisioning Requirement for    Standard Assets
5.5(i)
58
DBOD.NO.BP.BC.34/21.04.132/2005­-06
08.09.2005
Debt    restructuring mechanism for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) ­Announcement    made by the Union Finance Minister
Part    B
59
DBOD.NO.BP.BC.16/21.04.048/2005­-06
13.07.2005
Guidelines on    purchase/sale of Non performing Assets
7
60
DBOD.BP.BC.34/21.04.048/2004­-05
26.08.2004
Repayment    schedule of rural housing loans
4.2.13(vi)
61
DBOD.BP.BC.29/21.04.048/2004-­05
13.08.2004
Prudential    norms – State Government guaranteed exposures
4.2.14
62
RPCD.No.Plan.BC.92/04.09.01/2003-­04
24.06.2004
Flow    of credit to
Agriculture
4.2.13    (iv)
63
DBOD    No.BP.BC 102/21.04.048/2003­-04
24.06.2004
Prudential    Norms for
Agricultural    Advances
2.1.2(iv),(v)    4.2.10, 4.2.13(i)
64
DBOD    No.BP.BC.99/21.04.048/2003-­04
21.06.2004
Additional    Provisioning
Requirement    for NPAs
5
65
DBOD    No. BP.BC
97/21.04.141/2003-­04
17.06.2004
Prudential    Guidelines on
Unsecured    Exposures
5.4
66
DBOD    No.BP.BC 96/21.04.103/2003­-04
17.06.2004
Country Risk    Management Guidelines
5.9.8
67
DBODNo.BP.BC    96/21.04.048/2002­-03
23.04.2003
Guidelines on    sale of  financial assets to    Securitisation / reconstruction company and related issues
6
68
DBOD    BP.BC. NO. 74/21.04.048/2002-­2003
27.02.2003
Projects under    implementation involving time overrun
4.2.15
69
DBOD    No. BP.BC. 71/21.04.103/2002­-2003
19.02.2003
Risk Management    Systems in Banks – Guidelines on Country Risk Management
5.9.8
70
DBOD    BP.BC. No. 69/21.04.048/2002­-03
10.02.2003
Upgradation    of loan
accounts classified    as NPAs
4.2.5
71
DBOD.    BP.BC No. 44/21.04.048/2002-­03
30.11.2002
Agricultural    loans affected by natural calamities
4.2.13
72
DBOD    No.BP.BC. 108/ 21.04.048/2001­-2002
28.05.2002
Income    recognition, asset classification and provisioning on advances ­treatment    of  projects under implementation    involving time overrun
4.2.15
73
DBOD    No.BP.BC.101/ 21.01.002/2001­-02
09.05.2002
Corporate    Debt Restructuring
Part    B
74
DBOD    No.BP.BC.100/ 21.01.002/2001-­02
09.05.2002
Prudential    norms on asset classification
4.1.2
75
DBOD    No.BP.BC.59/ 21.04.048/2001-­2002
22.01.2002
Prudential    norms on income recognition, asset classification and Provisioning ­agricultural    advances
4.2.13
76
DBOD    No.BP.BC.25/ 21.04.048/2000­-2001
11.09.2001
Prudential    norms on income recognition, asset classification and provisioning
3
77
DBOD    No.BP.BC.15/ 21.04.114/2000­-2001
23.08.2001
Corporate    Debt Restructuring
Part    B
78
DBOD    No.BP.BC.132/ 21.04.048/2000­-2001
14.06.2001
Income    Recognition, Asset Classification and Provisioning for Advances
4.2
79
DBOD    No. BP.BC.128/ 21.04.048/2000-­2001
07.06.2001
SSI    Advances Guaranteed by CGTSI – Risk­weight and provisioning norms
5.9.5
80
DBOD    No.BP.BC. 116/21.04.048/2000-­2001
02.05.2001
Monetary &    Credit Policy Measures
2001­-02
2.1.2
81
DBOD    No.BP.BC.98/ 21.04.048/2000­-2001
30.03.2001
Treatment    of Restructured Accounts
Part    B
82
DBOD    No.BP.BC.40/ 21.04.048/2000­-2001
30.10.2000
Income    Recognition, Asset Classification and Provisioning ­Reporting of NPAs to    RBI
3.5
83
DBOD.No.BP.BC.164/21.04.048/2000
24.04.2000
Prudential    Norms on Capital Adequacy, Income Recognition, Asset Classification and    Provisioning, etc.
5.5
84
DBOD.No.BP.BC.144/21.04.048/2000
29.02.2000
Income    Recognition, Asset Classification and Provisioning and Other Related    Matters and Adequacy Standards ­-Takeout Finance
4.2.16
85
DBOD.No.BP.BC.138/21.04.048/2000
07.02.2000
Income    Recognition, Asset Classification and Provisioning ­Export Project Finance
4.2.18
86
DBOD.No.BP.BC.103/21.04.0    48/ 99
21.10.99
Income    Recognition, Asset Classification and Provisioning ­Agricultural Finance by    Commercial Banks through Primary Agricultural Credit Societies
4.2.10
87
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.70/24.01.    001/ 99
17.07.99
Equipment    Leasing Activity ­Accounting/ Provisioning Norms
3.2.3,    5.8
88
DBOD.No.BP.BC.45/21.04.04    8/99
10.05.99
Income    Recognition Asset Classification and Provisioning ­Concept of Commencement of    Commercial Production
4.2.15
89
DBOD.No.BP.BC.120/21.04.0    48/ 98
29.12.98
Prudential  norms  on Income Recognition, Asset    Classification and
Provisioning    ­Agricultural Loans Affected by Natural Calamities
4.2.13
90
DBOD.No.BP.BC.103/21.01.0    02/ 98
31.10.98
Monetary &    Credit Policy Measures
4.1.1,    4.1.2, 5.5
91
DBOD.No.BP.BC.17/21.04.04    8/98
04.03.98
Prudential    Norms  on Income Recognition, Asset Classification and
4.2.13
92
DOS.    No. CO.PP. BC.6/
11.01.005/    96­97
15.05.97
Assessments     relating to asset valuation and loan loss provisioning
5.1.1
93
DBOD.No.BP.BC.29/21.04.04    8/97
09.04.97
Income    Recognition Asset Classification and Provisioning ­Agricultural Advances
4.2.13
94
DBOD.No.BP.BC.14/21.04.048/97
19.02.97
Income    Recognition Asset Classification and Provisioning ­Agricultural Advances
4.2.13
95
DBOD.No.BP.BC.9/21.04.048    /97
29.01.97
Prudential    Norms ­Capital Adequacy, Income Recognition Asset Classification and    Provisioning
4.2.4,    4.2.5, 4.2.8, 4.2.9
96
DBOD.No.BP.BC.163/21.04.0    48/ 96
24.12.96
Classification    of
Advances with    Balance less than Rs. 25,000/­
4.1
97
DBOD.No.BP.BC.65/21.04.048/96
04.06.96
Income    Recognition
Asset    Classification and Provisioning
4.2.8
98
DBOD.No.BP.BC.26/21.04.048/96
19.03.96
Nonperforming
Advances ­Reporting    to RBI
3.5
99
DBOD.No.BP.BC.25/21.04.048/96
19.03.96
Income    Recognition
Asset    Classification and Provisioning
4.2.8,    4.2.14
100
DBOD.No.BP.BC.134/21.04.0    48/ 95
20.11.95
EXIM    Bank's New Lending Programme Extension of Guarantee­ cum­ Refinance to    Commercial Bank in respect of Post­ shipment Supplier's Credit
4.2.17
101
DBOD.No.BP.BC.36/21.04.048/95
03.04.95
Income    Recognition
Asset    Classification and Provisioning
3.2.2,    3.3, 4.2.17, 5.8.1
102
DBOD.No.BP.BC.134/21.04.0    48/ 94
14.11.94
Income    Recognition
Asset    Classification
Provisioning    and Other Related Matters
5
103
DBOD.No.BP.BC.58/21.04.04    8­94
16.05.94
Income    Recognition Asset Classification and Provisioning and Capital    Adequacy Norms ­Clarifications
5
104
DBOD.No.BP.BC.50/21.04.048/94
30.04.94
Income    Recognition Asset Classification and Provisioning
5.9.4
105
DOS.BC.4/16.14.001/93­94
19.03.94
Credit    Monitoring System ­Health Code System for Borrowal Accounts
1.3
106
DBOD.No.BP.BC.8/21.04.043    /94
04.02.94
Income    Recognition, Provisioning and Other Related Matters
3.1.2,    3.4, 4.2
107
DBOD.No.BP.BC.195/21.04.0    48/ 93
24.11.93
Income    Recognition, Asset Classification and Provisioning ­Clarifications
4.2
108
DBOD.No.BP.BC.95/21.04.048/93
23.03.93
Income    Recognition, Asset Classification, Provisioning and Other Related Matters
3.2,    5
109
DBOD.No.BP.BC.59/21.04.04    3­92
17.12.92
Income    Recognition, Asset Classification and Provisioning ­Clarifications
3.2.1,    3.2.2, 4.2
110
DBOD.No.BP.BC.129/21.04.0    43­92
27.04.92
Income    Recognition, Asset Classification, Provisioning and Other Related Matters
1.1,    1.2, 2.1.1, 2.2, 3.1.1,3.1.3, 4.1, 4.1.1, 4.1.2, 4.1.3, 4.2, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3,    5.4
111
DBOD.No.BP.BC.42/C.469    (W)­90
31.10.90
Classification    of Non­ Performing Loans
3.1.1
112
DBOD.No.Fol.BC.136/C.249­85
07.11.85
Credit    Monitoring System ­Introduction of Health Code for  Borrowal Accounts in Banks
1.3
113
DBOD.No.BP.BC.35/21.01.002/99
24.04.99
Monetary &    Credit
Policy Measures
4.2
114
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.18/24.01.001/    93­94
19.02.94
Equipment    Leasing,
Hire    Purchase,
Factoring,    etc. Activities
2.1,    3.2.3
1
For this purpose, CRE-RH would consist of loans to  builders/developers for residential housing projects (except for captive  consumption) under CRE segment. Such projects should ordinarily not include  non-residential commercial real estate. However, integrated housing projects  comprising of some commercial space (e.g. shopping complex, school, etc.) can  also be classified under CRE-RH, provided that the commercial area in the  residential housing project does not exceed 10% of the total Floor Space Index  (FSI) of the project. In case the FSI of the commercial area in the  predominantly residential housing complex exceeds the ceiling of 10%, the  project loans should be classified as CRE and not CRE-RH.
2
As a countercyclical measure, on February 7, 2014,  banks were permitted to utilise upto 33 per cent of countercyclical  provisioning buffer / floating provisions held by them as on March 31, 2013,  for making specific provisions for non-performing assets, as per the policy  approved by their Board of Directors.
3
This change has been  introduced as a result of the introduction of Base Rate System w.e.f. July 1,  2010 vide
circular DBOD.No.Dir.BC.88/13.03.00/2009-10 dated April 9, 2010
on  ‘Guidelines on the Base Rate’.
4
‘Special Mention Account’ (SMA) was introduced in  terms of RBI
Circular No. DBS.CO.OSMOS/B.C./4/33.04.006/2002-2003 dated  September 12, 2002
, whereby banks are required to identify incipient stress in  the account by creating a sub-asset category viz., SMA.
5
One of the important elements of DCA would be a  'stand still' agreement binding for the period from the date of signing of DCA  to the date of approval of restructuring package as per the time frame  indicated in paragraphs 22.3 and 22.4 of these Guidelines. Under this clause,  both the debtor and creditor(s) shall agree to a legally binding 'stand-still'  whereby both the parties commit themselves not to take recourse to any other  legal action during the 'stand-still' period. This would be necessary to  undertake the necessary debt restructuring exercise without any outside  intervention, judicial or otherwise. However, the stand-still clause will be  applicable only to any civil action either by the borrower or any lender  against the other party and will not cover any criminal action. Further, during  the stand-still period, outstanding foreign exchange forward contracts,  derivative products, etc., can be crystallised, provided the borrower is  agreeable to such crystallisation. The borrower will additionally undertake  that during the stand-still period the documents will stand extended for the  purpose of limitation and also that it will not approach any other authority  for any relief and the directors of the borrowing company will not resign from  the Board of Directors during the stand-still period.
6
The constitution of the IEC and the funding  needs for payment of fees for independent experts has been decided by Indian  Banks’ Association (IBA) in consultation with RBI. Banks have been advised by  IBA in this regard vide its circular No.  C&I/CIR/2013-14/9307 dated April 29, 2014
7
A non-cooperative borrower is broadly one who does not  provide necessary information required by a lender to assess its financial  health even after 2 reminders; or denies access to securities etc. as per terms  of sanction or does not comply with other  terms of loan agreements within  stipulated period; or is hostile / indifferent / in denial mode to negotiate  with the bank on repayment issues; or plays for time by giving false impression  that some solution is on horizon; or resorts to vexatious tactics such as  litigation to thwart timely resolution of the interest of the lender/s. The  borrowers will be given 30 days’ notice to clarify their stand before their  names are reported as non-cooperative borrowers.
8
*Gross NPAs as per item 2 of Annex to
DBOD Circular  DBOD.BP.BC.No. 46/21.04.048/2009-10 dated September 24, 2009
which specified a  uniform method to compute Gross Advances, Net Advances, Gross NPAs and Net  NPAs.
9
Technical or prudential write-off is the amount of  non-performing loans which are outstanding in the books of the branches, but  have been written-off (fully or partially) at Head Office level.  Amount of Technical write-off should be certified  by statutory auditors. (Defined in our
circular reference DBOD.No.BP.BC. 64  /21.04.048/2009-10 dated December 1, 2009
on Provisioning Coverage for  Advances)