(152 kb)
Master Circular– Regulatory Framework for Core Investment Companies (CICs)
RBI/2014-15/41
DNBS (PD) CC No.393/03.02.001/2014-15
July 1, 2014
To
All Core Investment  Companies
Dear Sirs,
Master Circular–  Regulatory Framework for Core Investment Companies (CICs)
As you are aware, in  order to have all current instructions on the subject at one place, the Reserve  Bank of India issues updated circulars / notifications on various subjects. The  instructions on the captioned subject as updated till June 30, 2014 are  reproduced below. The updated
Master Circular
has also been placed on RBI  web-site (
http://www.rbi.org.in
).
Yours faithfully,
(K. K. Vohra)
Principal Chief General Manager
Table of Contents
Para No
Particulars
1.
Background
2.
Core Investment Companies (CICs)
3.
Systemically Important NBFCs
4.
Systemic Importance of CICs
5.
Constraints faced by CICs
6.
Transition Period
7.
Action plan to comply with Conditions
8.
Extent    of the CICs (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2011
9.
Definitions
10.
Registration
11.
Capital    Requirements
12.
Leverage    ratio
13.
Exemptions
14.
Submission    of Annual Statutory Auditors Certificate
MISCELLANEOUS
15.
Exemptions
16.
Interpretations
17.
CICs - Overseas Investment    (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2012
17.1
Background
17.2
Prior Approval of RBI in cases of Overseas investment by CICs
17.3
Eligibility    Criteria
17.4
General Conditions
17.5
Special Conditions
18
CICs -Guidelines on Investment in Insurance
Appendix
Regulatory Framework for Core Investment Companies  (CICs)
1. Background
The Bank had announced in the Annual Policy 2010-2011  that companies which have their assets predominantly as investments in shares  for holding stake in group companies but not for trading, and also do not carry  on any other financial activity, i.e., CICs, justifiably deserve a differential  treatment in the regulatory prescription applicable to Non-Banking Financial  Companies which are non deposit taking and systemically important to this  extent. Draft guidelines had been placed  on the RBI website on April 21, 2010. The feedback received from the market  participants were considered and the following regulatory framework for CICs  was framed.
2. CICs
were not considered  as carrying on the business of acquisition of shares and securities in the  following circumstances, namely,
(i) not less than 90% of their assets were in  investments in shares for the purpose of holding stake in the investee  companies;
(ii) they  were not trading in these shares except for block sale (to dilute or divest  holding);
(iii) they were not carrying on any other financial  activities; and
(iv) they were not holding / accepting public  deposits.
As such, companies fulfilling the above criteria were  not required to obtain Certificate of Registration (COR) from RBI under Section  45 IA of the RBI Act 1934. It has been found in practice that it is very  difficult to determine whether a company has invested in the shares of another  company for the purpose of holding stake or for the purpose of trade. Even where initially investments had been  made in some cases for holding stake in the investee company, for various  reasons these shares were sold or additional shares were purchased. Such absence of clarity is not in the interest  of the system. It was therefore decided  that investing in shares of other companies, even for the purpose of holding  stake should also be regarded as carrying on the business of acquisition of  shares in terms of Section 45I(c) (ii) of RBI Act.
3. Systemically Important NBFCs
In 2006, in view of the systemic risk arising from  access to public funds such as bank borrowings, CPs, etc. by NBFCs, and their  interconnectedness with the financial system, the focus of regulatory concern  widened to include non deposit taking NBFCs also. Accordingly, non deposit  taking NBFCs with an asset size of Rs.  100 crore and more as per the last audited balance sheet were defined as  systemically important (NBFCs-ND-SI), and  a regulatory framework was put in place for them vide Circular No 86  dated Dec 12, 2006.
4. Systemic Importance of CICs
For the reasons stated above, investing in shares of  other companies, even for the purpose of holding stake should be regarded as  carrying on the business of NBFI. In view of the systemic implications of  access to public funds such as funds raised through CP, debentures,  inter-corporate deposits and other borrowings by CICs having asset size of Rs.100  crore or above, such systemically important CIC will be required to obtain CoR  under Section 45-IA of the RBI Act and be governed by the provisions of the RBI  Act, 1934 and the directions issued by the RBI from time to time.
5. Constraints  faced by CICs
In view of the specificities of the business model of  CICs, viz. holding stake in group companies and funding group concerns, CICs  find it difficult to comply with the extant NOF requirements and exposure norms  for NBFCs specified by the RBI. These issues have been considered while  formulating the regulatory framework for CICs.
6. Transition  Period
(i) All CICs-ND-SI, irrespective of whether they were  specifically exempted in the past from registration with the RBI or not, were  required to apply to the RBI for obtaining the CoR within a period of six  months from the date of the Notification dated Jan 05, 2011.
(ii) It was further clarified that the  companies which fail to apply within the stipulated period of six months would  be regarded as contravening the provisions of Section 45IA of the RBI Act, 1934  if they are regarded as carrying on the business of CICs-ND-SI as described  above.
(iii) Companies which presently have an asset size of  less than Rupees 100 crore would be required to apply to RBI for COR within  three months of the date of achieving a balance sheet size of Rs 100 crore.
7. Action  plan to comply with Conditions
(i) CICs-ND-SI applying for COR which do not meet the conditions stipulated in the CICs(Reserve Bank) Directions, 2011, were advised to approach the Regional Office of the RBI in  whose jurisdiction they are registered, with an action plan for compliance with these conditions, in order to avail the  exemptions stated in para 6(v) of the
DNBS(PD)  CC.No.197/03.10.001/2010-11 dated Aug 12, 2010
.
(ii) RBI may examine the action plan of such  CICs-ND-SI as have applied for COR and impose such conditions and restrictions  as it deems fit.
1
The CICs (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2011
8. Extent of the directions
These directions shall apply to  every CIC, that is to say, a non-banking financial company carrying on the  business of acquisition of shares and securities and which satisfies the  following conditions as on the date of the last audited balance sheet:-
(i) it  holds not less than 90% of its net assets in the form of investment in equity  shares, preference shares, bonds, debentures, debt or loans in group companies;
(ii) its investments in the equity shares  (including instruments compulsorily convertible into equity shares within a  period not exceeding 10 years from the date of issue) in group companies  constitutes not less than 60% of its net assets as mentioned in clause (i)  above;
(iii) it  does not trade in its investments in shares, bonds, debentures, debt or loans  in group companies except through block sale for the purpose of dilution or  disinvestment;
(iv) it  does not carry on any other financial activity referred to in Section 45I(c)  and 45I(f) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 except investment in
(a) bank deposits,
(b) money  market instruments, including money  market mutual funds
(c) government  securities, and
(d) bonds or debentures issued by group companies,  granting of loans to group companies and  issuing guarantees on behalf of group companies.
9. Definitions
(a) For the purpose of these directions, unless the  context otherwise requires, -
“adjusted net worth” means –
(i) the aggregate,  as appearing in the last audited balance sheet as at the end of the financial  year, of Owned Funds as defined in Non  Banking Financial (Non Deposit Accepting or Holding) Companies Prudential Norms  (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2007;
(ii) as  increased by :-
(A) 50% of the unrealized appreciation in the  book value of quoted investments as at the date of the last audited balance  sheet as at the end of the financial year (such appreciation being calculated,  as the excess of the aggregate market value of such investments over the book  value of such investments); and
(B) the  increase, if any, in the equity share  capital since the date of the last audited balance sheet.
(iii) as  reduced by :-
(A) the amount of diminution in the aggregate  book value of quoted investments (such diminution being calculated as the  excess of the book value of such investments over the aggregate market value of  such investments ) and
(B) the  reduction, if any, in the equity share capital since the date of the last audited  balance sheet.
(b) “Companies in the Group” means an  arrangement involving two or more entities related to each other through any of  the following relationships, viz. Subsidiary – parent (defined in terms of AS  21), Joint venture (defined in terms of AS 27), Associate (defined in terms of  AS 23), Promoter-promotee [as provided in the SEBI (Acquisition of Shares and  Takeover) Regulations, 1997] for listed companies, a related party (defined in  terms of AS 18) Common brand name, and investment in equity shares of 20% and  above).
(c) “investment” means investment in shares,  stock, bonds, debentures or securities issued by the Government or local  authority or other marketable securities of a like nature.
(d) “market value of quoted investments” means  the average of the weekly highs and lows of the closing price of the  investments, on a recognized stock exchange where the investment is most  actively traded, during the period of 26 weeks immediately preceding the end of  the financial year at which date the last audited balance sheet is available.
(e) “net  assets” means total assets excluding –
(i) cash and bank balances;
(ii) investment in money market instruments and money market mutual funds
(iii) advance payments of taxes; and
(iv) deferred tax payment.
(f) “outside liabilities” means total  liabilities as appearing on the liabilities side of the balance sheet excluding  'paid up capital' and 'reserves and surplus', instruments compulsorily  convertible into equity shares within a period not exceeding 10 years from the  date of issuebut including all forms of debt and obligations having the characteristics  of debt, whether created by issue of hybrid instruments or otherwise, and value  of guarantees issued, whether appearing on the balance sheet or not.
(g) “Public  funds
"
includes  funds raised either directly or indirectly through public deposits, Commercial  Papers, debentures, inter-corporate deposits and bank finance but excludes  funds raised by issue of instruments compulsorily convertible into equity shares  within a period not exceeding 10 years from the date of issue.
(h) “systemically important CIC” means a CIC having total assets of not less  than Rs.100 crore either individually or in aggregate along with other CICs in the Group and which raises or holds public  funds.
(i)  “total assets” means the total of all assets appearing on the assets  side of the balance sheet.
10. Registration
(a) Every Systemically Important CIC (CIC-ND-SI) shall  apply to the RBI for grant of Certificate of Registration, irrespective of any  advice in the past, issued by the RBI, to the contrary.
(b) Every  CIC shall apply to the RBI for grant of Certificate of Registration within a  period of three months from the date of becoming a CIC-ND-SI.
2
(c) Every CIC exempted from registration requirement  with RBI shall pass a Board Resolution that it will not, in the future, access  public funds. However CICs may be required to issue guarantees or take on other  contingent liabilities on behalf of their group entities. Before doing so, all  CICs must ensure that they can meet the obligation there under, as and when  they arise. In particular, CICs which are exempt from registration requirement  must be in a position to do so without recourse to public funds in the event  the liability devolves, else they shall approach RBI for registration before accessing  public funds. If unregistered CICs with asset size above Rs. 100 crore access public  funds without obtaining a Certificate of Registration (CoR) from RBI, they will  be seen as violating CICs (Reserve Bank)  Directions, 2011 dated January 05, 2011.
11. Capital Requirements
Adjusted Net Worth of a CIC-ND-SI shall at no point of  time be less than 30% of its aggregate risk weighted assets on balance sheet  and risk adjusted value of off-balance sheet items as on the date of the last  audited balance sheet as at the end of the financial year.
Explanations
On balance sheet assets
(1) In these Directions, degrees of credit risk  expressed as percentage weightages have been assigned to balance sheet assets.  Hence, the value of each asset / item requires to be multiplied by the relevant  risk weights to arrive at risk adjusted value of assets. The aggregate shall be  taken into account for reckoning the minimum capital ratio. The risk weighted  asset shall be calculated as the weighted aggregate of funded items as detailed  hereunder:
Weighted risk assets - On-Balance Sheet items
Percentage weight
(i) Cash and bank balances including fixed deposits and certificates of deposits with banks
0
(ii) Investments
(a) Approved securities
0
[Except at (c) below]
(b) Bonds of public sector banks
20
(c) Fixed deposits/certificates of deposits/bonds
              of public financial institutions
100
(d) Shares of all companies and    debentures / 
            bonds/commercial papers of all companies
            and units of all mutual funds
100
(iii) Current assets
(a) Stock on hire (net book value)
100
(b) Intercorporate loans/deposits
100
(c) Loans and advances fully secured against deposits held
0
(d) Loans to staff
0
(e) Other secured loans and advances    considered good
100
(f) Bills purchased/discounted
100
(g) Others (To be specified)
100
(iv) Fixed Assets (net of depreciation)
(a) Assets leased out (net book value)
100
(b) Premises
100
(c) Furniture & Fixtures
100
(v) Other assets
(a) Income tax deducted at source (net of provision)
0
(b) Advance tax paid (net of provision)
0
(c) Interest due on Government securities
0
(d) Others (to be specified)
100
Notes:
(i) Netting may be done only in respect of assets  where provisions for depreciation or for bad and doubtful debts have been made.
(ii) Assets which have been deducted from  owned fund to arrive at net owned fund shall have a weightage of ‘zero’.
(iii) While calculating the aggregate of funded  exposure of a borrower for the purpose of assignment of risk weight, such  non-banking financial companies may net off the amount of cash margin/caution  money/security deposits (against which right to set-off is available) held as  collateral against the advances out of the total outstanding exposure of the  borrower.
(iv) The counterparty credit risk, arising out  of exposure of CICs-ND-SI to CCIL on account of securities financing  transactions (CBLOs) will carry a risk weight of zero, as it is presumed that  the CCP’s exposures to their counterparties are fully collateralised on a daily  basis, thereby providing protection for the CCP’s credit risk exposures. The  deposits / collaterals kept by CICs-ND-SI with CCIL will attract a risk weight  of 20%.
Off-balance sheet items
(2) In these Directions, degrees of credit risk  exposure attached to off-balance sheet items have been expressed as percentage  of credit conversion factor. Hence, the face value of each item requires to be  first multiplied by the relevant conversion factor to arrive at risk adjusted  value of off-balance sheet item. The aggregate shall be taken into account for  reckoning the minimum capital ratio. This shall have to be again multiplied by  the risk weight of 100. The risk adjusted value of the off-balance sheet items  shall be calculated as per the credit conversion factors of non-funded items as  detailed hereunder: -
Nature of item
Credit conversion factor Percentage
i) Financial & other guarantees
100
ii) Share/debenture underwriting obligations
50
iii) Partly-paid shares/debentures
100
iv) Bills discounted/rediscounted
100
v) Lease contracts entered into but
              yet to be executed
100
12. Leverage  Ratio
Theoutside liabilities of a CIC-ND-SI shall at no  point of time exceed 2.5 times its Adjusted Net Worth as on the date of the  last audited balance sheet as at the end of the financial year.
13. Exemptions
(i)
3
The  provisions of section 45-IA (1)(b) of the Act shall not apply to a non-banking  financial company being a Systemically Important CIC as defined in the CICs  (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2011, subject to the condition that it meets with  the capital requirements and leverage ratio as specified in the said  directions.
(ii)
4
The  provisions of paragraphs 15, 16 and 18 of the Non-Banking Financial (Non-  Deposit Accepting or Holding) Companies Prudential Norms (Reserve Bank)  Directions, 2007, contained in Notification No. DNBS.193/DG(VL)-2007 dated  February 22, 2007shall not apply to a  Systemically Important CIC as defined in the CIC Directions, subject to the  condition that it submits the Annual Auditors’ Certificate and meets with the  capital requirements and leverage ratio, as specified in the CIC Directions.
14. Submission of Annual Statutory Auditors Certificate
Every CIC-ND-SI shall submit an annual certificate  from its statutory auditors regarding compliance with the requirements of these  directions within a period of one month from the date of finalisation of the  balance-sheet.
MISCELLANEOUS
15. Exemptions
The RBI may, if it considers it necessary for  avoiding any hardship for any other just and sufficient reason, grant extension  of time to comply with or exempt any CIC-ND-SI from all or any of the  provisions of these Directions either generally or for any specified period,  subject to such conditions as the RBI may impose.
16. Interpretations
For the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of  these Directions, the RBI may, if it considers necessary, issue necessary  clarifications in respect of any matter covered herein and the interpretation  of any provision of these Directions given by the RBI shall be final and  binding on all the parties concerned.
5
[
17. Core Investment Companies(CICs)-Overseas  Investment (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2012
17.1 Background
Non-Banking Financial Companies (Opening of Branch /  Subsidiary / Joint Venture/Representative Office or Undertaking Investment Abroad  by NBFCs) Directions, 2011 dated June 14, 2011 have specified general and specific conditions for overseas  investment by NBFCs. The applicability of the Directions for CICs was examined  and in view of their unique nature of business (investment only for holding  purpose), certain modifications have been found were made in the Directions. These directions are in addition to those  prescribed by Foreign Exchange Department for overseas investment.
CICs invest primarily in group  companies, in different sectors of the economy. Being holding companies they  need to invest in both financial and non-financial activities. It was therefore  decided to issue a separate set of Directions to CICs with regard to their  overseas investments.
All CICs investing in joint ventures /  subsidiaries / representative offices overseas in financial sector will require  prior approval from the Bank. The approval will be subject to the CIC  fulfilling the conditions enumerated in the enclosed Directions issued by RBI  in exercise of powers under Sections 45JA, 45K and 45L of  the RBI Act, 1934 vide Notification No. DNBS(PD)252/CGM(US)/2012 dated December 6, 2012.
Thus, should CICs  currently exempted from registration, desire to make overseas investments in  financial sector, they would require a CoR from RBI and shall have to comply  with all the regulations applicable to registered CICs. However exempted CICs  do not require to be registered with RBI for making investments in  non-financial sector.
17.2 Prior  Approval of RBI in cases of Overseas investment by CICs
These  Directions are applicable to all CICs
6
(whether  registered with RBI or exempted from registration) that intend to invest  overseas.
7
Investment in financial sector overseas
CICs desirous of making overseas investment  in financial sector shall hold a Certificate of Registration (CoR) from Reserve  Bank of India (the Bank) and shall comply with all the regulations applicable  to registered CICs. Hence, CICs that are  presently exempted from the regulatory framework of the Bank (exempted CICs),  would be required to be registered with the Bank and would be regulated like  CICs-ND-SI, for the purpose of overseas investment in financial sector.
Investment in non-financial sector
Exempted CICs making overseas investment in  non-financial sector will not require registration from the RBI and hence,  these Directions are not applicable to them. Further, a registered CIC need not  obtain prior approval from Department of Non-Banking Supervision (DNBS), RBI,  for overseas investment in non-financial sector. However it should report to  the Regional Office of DNBS where it is registered within 30 days of such  investment in the stipulated format of quarterly return and also continue to  submit the return quarterly.
The eligibility criteria for investments abroad  and other conditions prescribed for CICs are given in the following paragraphs.
17.3 Eligibility  Criteria
The  Adjusted Net Worth (ANW) of the CIC shall not be less than 30% of its aggregate  risk weighted assets on balance sheet and risk adjusted value of off-balance  sheet items as on the date of the last audited balance sheet as at the end of  the financial year. The CIC shall continue to meet the requirement of minimum  ANW, post overseas investment. For this purpose, the risk weights are as laid  down in the Notification No.219 dated January 05, 2011.
The  level of Net Non-Performing Assets of the CIC should not be more than 1% of the  net advances as on the date of the last audited balance sheet.
The CIC should generally be earning profit  continuously for the last three years and its performance should be  satisfactory during the period of its existence.
17.4 General Conditions
Direct  investment in activities prohibited under FEMA will not be permitted.
The  total overseas investment should not exceed 400% of the owned funds of the CIC.
The  total overseas investment in financial sector should not exceed 200% of its  owned funds.
Investment  in financial sector shall be only in regulated entities abroad.
8
Entities set up abroad or  acquired abroad shall be treated as wholly owned subsidiaries (WOS) /joint  ventures (JV) abroad.
9
Overseas investments by a CIC in financial /non-financial sector would be restricted to its financial commitment. However with regard to issuing guarantees/Letter of Comfort in this regard the following may be noted:
(a) The CIC can issue guarantees/letter of comfort to the overseas subsidiary engaged in non-financial activity;
(b) CICs must ensure that investments made overseas do not result in creation of complex structures. In case the structure overseas requires a Non-Operating Holding Company, there should not be more than two tiers in the structure. CICs having more than one non-operating holding company in existence, in their investment structure, shall report the same to the RBI for a review.
(c) CICs shall comply with the regulations issued under FEMA, 1999 from time to time;
(d) An annual certificate from statutory auditors shall be submitted by the CIC to the Regional Office of DNBS where it is registered, certifying that it has fully complied with all the conditions stipulated under these Guidelines for overseas investment. The certificate as on end March every year shall be submitted by April 30 each year;
(e) A quarterly return in the enclosed format as given in Annex shall be submitted by the CIC to the Regional Office of DNBS and also Department of Statistics and Information Management (DSIM), RBI within 15 days of the close of the quarter.
(f) If any serious adverse features come to the notice of the Bank, the permission granted shall be withdrawn. All approvals for investment abroad shall be subject to this condition.
17.5 Specific Conditions
(i) Opening of Branches
As CICs are non-operating entities, they will not, in the normal course,  be allowed to open branches overseas. CICs which had already set up branch(es) abroad for undertaking investment business were advised to approach RBI within  3 months from the date of these Directions for a review.
(ii) Opening of WOS/JV Abroad by CICs
In the case of opening of a WOS/JV abroad by a  CIC, all the conditions as stipulated above shall be applicable. The NoC to be issued by the Bank is independent of the overseas regulators’ approval process. In addition, the following conditions shall apply to all CICs:
(a) The WOS/JV being established abroad should not be a shell company i.e "a company that is incorporated, but has  no significant assets or operations." However companies undertaking activities such as financial consultancy and advisory services shall not be considered as shell companies;
(b) The WOS/JV being established abroad by the CIC should not be used as a vehicle for raising resources for creating assets in India for the Indian operations;
(c) In order to ensure compliance of the provisions, the parent CIC shall obtain periodical reports/audit reports at least quarterly about the business undertaken by the WOS/JV abroad and shall make them available to the inspecting officials of the Bank;
(d) If the WOS/JV has not undertaken any activity or such reports are not forthcoming, the approvals given for setting up the WOS/JV abroad shall be reviewed;
(e) The  WOS/JV shall make disclosure in its Balance Sheet the amount of liability of  the parent entity towards it and also whether it is limited to equity / loan or  if guarantees are given, the nature of such guarantees and the amount involved;
(f) All the operations of the WOS/JV abroad shall be subject to regulatory  prescriptions of the host country.
(iii) Opening of Representative Offices Abroad  by CICs
CICs will need prior approval from the DNBS, RBI for opening  representative offices abroad. The representative offices can be set up abroad for the purpose of liaison work, undertaking market study and research but not for undertaking any activity  which involves outlay of funds. The representative offices shall also comply  with regulations, if any, in this regard stipulated by a regulator in the host country. As it is not envisaged that such offices would be carrying on any activity other than liaison work, no line of credit should be extended.
The parent CICs shall obtain periodical reports about the business undertaken by the representative offices  abroad. If the representative offices have not undertaken any activity or such reports are not forthcoming, the Bank may advise the CIC to wind up the establishment.
Violation of these directions shall invite penal action under the provisions of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.
18. Core Investment Companies - Guidelines on Investment in Insurance
18.1
10
In view of the unique business model of CICs, it has been decided to issue a separate set of guidelines was issued for their entry  into insurance business.
While the eligibility criteria, in general, are similar to that for other NBFCs, no ceiling is being stipulated for CICs in their investment in an insurance joint venture. Further it is clarified that CICs cannot undertake insurance agency  business.
CICs exempted from registration with RBI do not require prior approval provided they fulfil all the necessary conditions of exemption as provided under/ in CC No.206 dated January 05, 2011. Their investment in insurance joint venture would be guided by IRDA norms.
18.2 Any CIC registered with RBI which satisfies the eligibility criteria given below will be permitted to set up a joint venture company for undertaking insurance business with risk participation, subject to safeguards. The maximum equity  contribution such a CIC can hold in the joint venture company will be as per IRDA approval.
18.3 The eligibility criteria for joint venture participant will be as under, as per the latest available audited balance sheet.
The owned funds of the CIC  shall not be less than Rs. 500 crore;
The level of  net non-performing assets shall be not more than 1% of the total advances;
The CIC should have registered net profit continuously for three consecutive  years;
The track record of the performance of the subsidiaries, if any, of the concerned CIC should be satisfactory;
The CIC shall comply with all applicable regulations including Core Investment Companies Directions, 2011. Thus CICs-ND-SI are required to maintain adjusted net worth which shall be not less than 30% of aggregate risk weighted assets on  balance sheet and risk adjusted value of off-balance sheet items.
18.4 No CIC would be allowed to conduct such business departmentally. Further, an NBFC (in its group / outside the group) would normally not be allowed to join an insurance company on risk participation basis and hence  should not provide direct or indirect financial support to the insurance venture.
18.5 Within the group, CICs may be permitted to invest up to 100% of the equity of the insurance company either on a solo basis or in joint venture with other non-financial entities in the group. This would ensure that only the CIC either on a solo basis or in a joint venture with the group company is exposed to insurance risk and the NBFC within the group is ring-fenced from such risk.
18.6 In case where a foreign partner contributes 26 per cent of the equity with the approval of insurance Regulatory and Development Authority/Foreign Investment Promotion Board, more than one CIC may be allowed to participate in the equity of the insurance joint venture. As such participants will also assume insurance risk, only those CICs which satisfy the criteria given in paragraph 2 above, would be eligible.
18.7 CICs cannot enter into insurance business as agents. CICs that wish to participate in insurance business as investors or on risk participation basis will be required to obtain prior approval of the RBI. The RBI will give permission on case to case basis keeping in view all relevant factors. It should be ensured that risks involved in insurance business do not get transferred to the CIC.
Notes:
(1) Holding  of equity by a promoter CIC in an insurance company or investment in insurance  business will be subject to compliance with any rules and regulations laid down  by the IRDA/Central Government. This will include compliance with Section 6AA  of the Insurance Act as amended by the IRDA Act, 1999, for divestment of equity  in excess of 26 per cent of the paid up capital within a prescribed period of  time.
(2) CICs  exempted from registration with RBI in terms of the Core Investment  Companies(Reserve Bank) Directions, 2011 do not require prior approval provided  they fulfil all the necessary conditions of exemption.
_________________________________________________________
Footnote: The Reference  to Companies Act, 1956 in the Master Circular will be changed as and when  change is effected in the original circular/notifications.
Appendix
List of Circulars
Sr. No.
Circular No
Date
1.
DNBS (PD) CC.No. 206 /03.10.001/2010-11
January 5, 2011
2.
DNBS.PD.CC.No.274/03.02.089/2011-12
May 11, 2012
3.
DNBS.PD.CC.No.311/03.10.01/2012-13
December    06, 2012
4.
DNBS.PD.CC.No.322/03.10.01/2012-13
April 1, 2013
1
Notification  No.DNBS.  (PD) 219 / CGM(US)-2011 dated January 5, 2011
2
Inserted  vide
Notification  No.DNBS (PD).245 / CGM(US)-2012 dated May 11, 2012
3
Notification  No. DNBS.(PD) 220 / CGM(US)-2011 dated  January 5, 2011
4
Notification  No. DNBS.(PD) 221 / CGM(US)-2011 dated January 5, 2011
5
Inserted  videDNBS.PD.CC.No.311/03.10.01/2012-13  dated December 06, 2012
6
CICs as defined in para 2(b) of the
circular  DNBS (PD) CC.No. 206/03.10.001/2010-11 January 5, 2011
titled Regulatory  Framework for Core Investment Companies
7
Financial  sector for this purpose would mean a sector/ service regulated by a Financial  Sector Regulator.
8
Under  FEMA, “Joint Venture” means a foreign entity formed, registered or incorporated  in accordance with the laws and regulations of the host country in which the  Indian party makes a direct investment. “WOS” means a foreign entity  formed,registered or incorporated in accordance with the laws and regulations  of the host country, whose entire capital is held by the Indian party.
9
Financial commitment" means the amount of direct investment by  way of contribution to equity and loan and fifty percent of the amount of  guarantees issued by an Indian party to or on behalf of its overseas JV/WOS.
10
Inserted  vide DNBS (PD) CC.No.322/03.10.001/2012-13, dated April 1, 2013