(1219 kb)
Master Circular - Prudential Norms on Capital Adequacy - Basel I Framework
RBI/2014-15/76
DBOD.No.BP.BC.4/21.01.002/2014-15
July 1, 2014
All  Local Area Banks
Dear  Sir,
Master Circular - Prudential Norms on Capital Adequacy - Basel I  Framework
Please refer to  the
Master Circular No. DBOD.BP.BC.21/21.01.002/2013-14  dated July 1, 2013
consolidating instructions / guidelines issued till June  30, 2013 on matters relating to prudential norms on capital adequacy under Basel I  framework.
2. The
Master Circular
has been suitably updated by incorporating  instructions issued up to June 30, 2014 and has also been placed on the RBI web-site (
http://www.rbi.org.in
).
Yours faithfully,
(Rajesh Verma)
Chief General Manager-in-Charge
Table of  Contents
S.    No.
Paragraph/ Annex    No.
Particulars
1
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Capital
3
1.2
Credit Risk
4
1.3
Market Risk
5
2
Guidelines
6
2.1
Components of    Capital
7
2.2
Capital Charge For    Market Risk
8
2.3
Capital Charge for    Credit Default Swaps
9
2.4
Capital Charge for    Subsidiaries
10
2.5
Procedure for    computation of CRAR
11
Annex I
Guidelines    on Perpetual Non-cumulative Preference Shares as part of Tier    I Capital
12
Annex 2
Terms    and Conditions for inclusion of Innovative Perpetual Debt Instruments
13
Annex 3
Terms    and Conditions applicable to Debt capital instruments to qualify as Upper Tier II    Capital
14
Annex 4
Terms    and Conditions applicable to Perpetual Cumulative Preference    Shares    (PCPS)/ Redeemable Non-Cumulative Preference Shares (RNCPS)/ Redeemable Cumulative Preference Shares    (RCPS) as part of Upper Tier II Capital.
15
Annex 5
Terms and    conditions for issue of unsecured bonds as    Subordinated Debt by banks to raise Tier II Capital
16
Annex 6
Capital Charge for    Specific Risk
17
Annex 7
Duration Method
18
Annex 8
Horizontal    Disallowance
19
Annex 9
Risk    Weights for calculation of capital charge for credit risk
20
Annex 10
Worked    out examples for computing capital charge for credit and market risks
21
Annex 11
List of    instructions and circulars consolidated
22
3
Glossary
Master Circular on ‘Prudential Norms on Capital Adequacy-  Basel I Framework’
Purpose
The Reserve Bank of India decided in April 1992 to  introduce a risk asset ratio system for banks (including foreign banks) in  India as a capital adequacy measure in line with the  Capital Adequacy Norms prescribed by Basel Committee. This circular prescribes the risk weights for the balance sheet assets, non-funded  items and other off-balance sheet exposures and  the minimum capital funds to be maintained as ratio to the aggregate  of the risk weighted assets and other exposures, as also, capital requirements in the trading book, on an ongoing basis.
Previous instructions
This master circular consolidates and updates the  instructions on the above subject contained in the circulars  listed in Annex 11.
Application
To  all Local Area Banks.
1. INTRODUCTION
This master circular covers instructions regarding the  components of capital and capital charge  required to be provided for by the banks for credit and market risks. It deals  with providing explicit capital charge for credit and market  risk and addresses the issues involved in computing capital charges  for interest rate related instruments in the trading book, equities in the  trading book and foreign exchange risk (including gold and other precious metals) in both trading and banking books.  Trading book for the purpose of these  guidelines includes securities included under the Held for Trading category, securities included under the Available For Sale  category, open gold position limits, open foreign exchange position  limits, trading positions in derivatives, and derivatives entered into for  hedging trading book exposures, including Credit Default Swaps (CDS).
1.1 Capital
The basic approach of  capital adequacy framework is that a bank should have sufficient capital to provide a stable resource to absorb any losses  arising from the risks in its business. Capital  is divided into tiers according to the characteristics/qualities of each qualifying  instrument. For supervisory purposes capital is split into two categories: Tier  I and Tier II. These categories represent  different instruments’ quality as capital. Tier I capital consists mainly of share capital and  disclosed reserves and it is a bank’s highest quality capital because it is fully available to cover losses. Tier II  capital on the other hand consists of  certain reserves and certain types of subordinated debt. The loss absorption capacity of Tier II capital is lower  than that of Tier I capital. When returns of the investors of the capital issues are counter guaranteed by the bank,  such investments will not be considered as Tier I/II regulatory capital  for the purpose of capital adequacy.
1.2 Credit Risk
Credit risk is most simply defined as the potential that  a bank’s borrower or counterparty may  fail to meet its obligations in accordance with agreed terms. It is the  possibility of losses associated with  diminution in the credit quality of borrowers or counterparties. In a bank’s portfolio, losses stem from outright default due  to inability or unwillingness of a customer  or a counterparty to meet commitments in relation to lending, trading, settlement and other financial transactions.  Alternatively, losses result from reduction in portfolio arising  from actual or perceived deterioration in credit quality.
For most banks, loans are the largest and the most  obvious source of credit risk; however, other  sources of credit risk exist throughout the activities of a bank, including in the  banking book and in the trading book, and both on and off balance sheet. Banks increasingly face credit risk (or counterparty  risk) in various financial instruments other than loans, including acceptances, inter-bank transactions, trade  financing, foreign exchange  transactions, financial futures, swaps, bonds, equities, options and in guarantees  and settlement of transactions.
The goal of credit risk management is to maximize a  bank’s risk-adjusted rate of return by  maintaining credit risk exposure within acceptable parameters. Banks need to manage the credit risk inherent in the entire portfolio,  as well as, the risk in the individual credits or transactions.  Banks should have a keen awareness of the need to identify measure, monitor and control credit risk, as well  as, to determine that they hold adequate  capital against these risks and they are adequately compensated for risks incurred.
1.3 Market Risk
Market risk refers to the risk to a bank resulting from  movements in market prices in particular changes in interest rates,  foreign exchange rates and equity and commodity prices. In simpler terms, it may be defined as the possibility of loss  to a bank caused by changes in the market variables. The Bank for  International Settlements (BIS) defines market  risk as “the risk that the value of ‘on’ or ‘off’ balance sheet positions will  be adversely affected by movements in  equity and interest rate markets, currency exchange rates and commodity  prices”. Thus, Market Risk is the risk to the bank’s earnings and capital due to changes in the market level of  interest rates or prices of securities, foreign exchange and equities,  as well as, the volatilities of those changes.
2.  GUIDELINES
2.1 Components of Capital
Capital funds:
The capital funds would include the components Tier I  capital and Tier II capital.
2.1.1 Elements  of Tier I Capital:
The elements of Tier I  capital include:
Paid-up capital (ordinary shares), statutory reserves,  and other disclosed free reserves, if any;
Perpetual Non-cumulative Preference Shares (PNCPS)  eligible for inclusion as Tier I capital - subject to laws in force  from time to time;
Innovative  Perpetual Debt Instruments (IPDI) eligible for inclusion as Tier I capital; and
Capital reserves representing surplus arising out of sale  proceeds of assets.
The guidelines covering Perpetual Non-Cumulative  Preference Shares (PNCPS) eligible 
        for inclusion as Tier I capital indicating the minimum  regulatory requirements are 
        furnished in
Annex 1
. The guidelines governing the  Innovative Perpetual Debt Instruments (IPDI)  eligible for inclusion as Tier I capital indicating the minimum regulatory  requirements are furnished in
Annex 2
.
Banks may include  quarterly / half yearly profits for computation of Tier I capital only if the quarterly / half yearly results are audited by  statutory auditors and not when the results are subjected to  limited review.
2.1.2 A special dispensation of amortising the  expenditure arising out of second pension option and enhancement of gratuity  was permitted to Public Sector Banks as also select private sector banks who  were parties to the 9th bipartite settlement with Indian Banks Association  (IBA). In view of the exceptional nature of the event, the unamortised expenditure  pertaining to these items need not be deducted from Tier I capital.
2.1.3 Elements of Tier II Capital
: The elements of Tier II capital include undisclosed reserves, revaluation reserves, general provisions and  loss reserves, hybrid capital instruments, subordinated debt and  investment reserve account.
(a) Undisclosed  Reserves
They can be included in capital, if they represent  accumulations of post-tax profits and  are not encumbered by any known liability and should not be routinely used for absorbing  normal loss or operating losses.
(b) Revaluation  Reserves
It would be prudent to consider revaluation reserves at  a discount of 55 per cent while determining  their value for inclusion in Tier II capital. Such reserves will have to be reflected  on the face of the Balance Sheet as revaluation reserves.
(c) General  Provisions and Loss Reserves
Such reserves can be included in Tier II capital if they  are not attributable to the actual diminution  in value or identifiable potential loss in any specific asset and are available to meet unexpected losses. Adequate care must  be taken to see that sufficient provisions  have been made to meet all known losses and foreseeable potential losses before considering general provisions  and loss reserves to be part of Tier  II capital. General provisions/loss reserves will be admitted up to a maximum  of 1.25 percent of total risk weighted assets.
'Floating Provisions' held by the banks, which is general  in nature and not made against any identified  assets, may be treated as a part of Tier II capital within the overall  ceiling of 1.25 percent of total risk weighted assets.
Excess provisions which arise on sale of NPAs would be  eligible Tier II capital subject to the overall ceiling of 1.25% of  total Risk Weighted Assets.
(d) Hybrid  Debt Capital Instruments
Those instruments which have close similarities to  equity, in particular when they are able to  support losses on an ongoing basis without triggering liquidation, may be included  in Tier II capital. At present the following instruments have been recognized  and placed under this category:
Debt capital instruments  eligible for inclusion as Upper Tier II capital ; and
Perpetual Cumulative  Preference Shares (PCPS) / Redeemable Non-Cumulative Preference  Shares (RNCPS) / Redeemable Cumulative Preference Shares (RCPS) as part of  Upper Tier II Capital.
The guidelines governing the instruments at (i) and (ii)  above, indicating the minimum regulatory requirements are furnished in
Annex 3
and
Annex 4
respectively.
(e) Subordinated Debt
Banks can raise, with the approval of their Boards,  rupee-subordinated debt as Tier II capital, subject to the  terms and conditions given in the
Annex 5
.
(f) Investment Reserve  Account
In the event of provisions created on account of  depreciation in the ‘Available for Sale’ or ‘Held for Trading’ categories being  found to be in excess of the required amount  in any year, the excess should be credited to the Profit & Loss account and  an equivalent amount (net of taxes, if any and net of transfer to Statutory  Reserves as applicable to such excess provision) should be appropriated to an  Investment Reserve Account in Schedule 2  –“Reserves & Surplus” under the head “Revenue and other Reserves” in the Balance Sheet and would be  eligible for inclusion under Tier II capital  within the overall ceiling of 1.25 per cent of total risk weighted assets prescribed  for General Provisions/ Loss Reserves.
(g) Banks are allowed to include the ‘General Provisions on  Standard Assets’ and ‘provisions held for  country exposures’ in Tier II capital. However, the provisions on ‘standard assets’ together with other ‘general provisions/  loss reserves’ and ‘provisions held for  country exposures’ will be admitted as Tier II capital up to a maximum  of 1.25 per cent of the total risk-weighted assets.
2.1.4 Step-up option – Transitional Arrangements
In terms of the document titled ‘Basel III - A global  regulatory framework for more resilient banks and banking systems’, released by  the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) in December 2010, regulatory  capital instrument should not have step-up or other incentives to redeem.  However, the BCBS has proposed certain transitional arrangements, in terms of  which only those instruments having such features which were issued before  September 12, 2010 will continue to be recognized as eligible capital  instruments under Basel III which becomes operational beginning January 01,  2013 in a phased manner. Hence, banks should not issue Tier I or Tier II  capital instruments with ‘step-up option’, so that these instruments continue  to remain eligible for inclusion in the new definition of regulatory capital.
2.1.5 Deductions  from computation of Capital funds:
2.1.5.1 Deductions  from Tier I Capital:
The following  deductions should be made from Tier I capital:
Intangible  assets and losses in the current period and those brought forward from previous  periods should be deducted from Tier I capital;
Creation of deferred tax asset (DTA) results in an  increase in Tier I capital of a bank without  any tangible asset being added to the banks’ balance sheet. Therefore, DTA, which  is an intangible asset, should be deducted from Tier I capital.
2.1.5.2 Deductions  from Tier I and Tier II Capital
(a) Equity/non-equity  investments in subsidiaries
The  investments of a bank in the equity as well as non-equity capital instruments  issued by a subsidiary, which are reckoned  towards its regulatory capital as per norms prescribed by the respective regulator, should be deducted at 50 per cent  each, from Tier I and Tier II capital of the parent bank, while  assessing the capital adequacy of the bank on 'solo' basis, under the Basel I  Framework.
(b) Credit  Enhancements pertaining to Securitization of Standard Assets
(i) Treatment  of First Loss Facility
The first loss credit enhancement provided by the  originator shall be reduced from capital funds  and the deduction shall be capped at the amount of capital that the bank would have been required to hold for the  full value of the assets, had they not been securitised. The deduction shall be  made at 50 per cent from Tier I and 50 per cent from Tier II  capital.
(ii) Treatment of Second Loss Facility
The second loss credit enhancement provided by the  originator shall be reduced from capital funds to the full extent.  The deduction shall be made 50 per cent from Tier I and 50 per cent from Tier  II capital.
(iii) Treatment of credit enhancements provided by third party
In case, the bank is acting as a third party service  provider, the first loss credit enhancement provided by it  shall be reduced from capital to the full extent as indicated at para (i)  above;
(iv) Underwriting by an originator
Securities  issued by the SPVs and devolved / held by the banks in excess of 10 per cent of  the original amount of issue, including secondary market purchases, shall be  deducted 50 per cent from Tier I capital and 50 per cent from Tier II capital;
(v) Underwriting by third party service  providers
If the bank has underwritten securities issued by SPVs  devolved and held by banks which are below investment grade the same will be  deducted from capital at 50 per cent from Tier I and 50 per cent  from Tier II.
2.1.6 Limit for Tier II elements
Tier II elements should be limited to a maximum of 100  per cent of total Tier I elements for the purpose of  compliance with the norms.
2.1.7 Norms  on cross holdings
(i) A bank’s / FI’s investments in all types of instruments  listed at 2.1.7 (ii) below, which are issued by  other banks / FIs and are eligible for capital status for the investee bank / FI, will be limited to 10 per cent of  the investing bank's capital funds (Tier I plus Tier II capital).
(ii) Banks' / FIs' investment in the following instruments  will be included in the prudential limit of 10 per cent referred to  at 2.1.7 (i) above.
Equity shares;
Preference shares eligible for capital status;
Innovative Perpetual Debt Instruments eligible as Tier I  capital;
Subordinated debt instruments;
Debt capital Instruments qualifying for Upper Tier II  status ; and
Any other instrument approved as in the nature of  capital.
(iii) Banks / FIs should not acquire any fresh stake in a  bank's equity shares, if by such acquisition,  the investing bank's / FI's holding exceeds 5 per cent of the investee  bank's equity capital.
(iv) Banks’ / FIs’ investments in the equity capital of  subsidiaries are at present deducted at 50 per cent each, from Tier  I and Tier II capital of the parent bank for  capital adequacy purposes. Investments in the instruments issued by banks / FIs which are listed at paragraph 2.1.7 (ii)  above, which are not deducted from Tier I capital of the investing bank/  FI, will attract 100 per cent risk weight for credit risk for capital adequacy  purposes.
(v) An indicative list of  institutions which may be deemed to be financial institutions for capital  adequacy purposes is as under:
Banks,
Mutual funds,
Insurance companies,
Non-banking financial companies,
Housing finance companies,
Merchant banking companies,
Primary dealers
Note
: The following investments are excluded from the  purview of the ceiling of 10 per cent prudential norm prescribed above:
Investments in equity  shares of other banks /FIs in India held under the provisions  of a statute.
Strategic investments in equity shares of  other banks/FIs incorporated outside India  as promoters/significant shareholders (i.e. Foreign Subsidiaries / Joint Ventures  / Associates).
Equity holdings outside India  in other banks / FIs incorporated outside India.
2.1.8 Swap Transactions
Banks are advised not to enter into swap transactions  involving conversion of fixed rate rupee  liabilities in respect of Innovative Tier I/Tier II bonds into floating rate  foreign currency  liabilities.
2.1.9 Minimum requirement of Capital Funds
Banks  are required to maintain a minimum CRAR of 9 per cent on an ongoing basis.
2.1.10 Capital Charge for Credit Risk
Banks  are required to manage the credit risks in their books on an ongoing basis and ensure that the capital requirements for credit  risks are being maintained on a continuous  basis, i.e. at the close of each business day. The applicable risk weights for calculation  of CRAR for credit risk are furnished in Annex 9.
2.2 Capital Charge for Market Risk
2.2.1 As an initial step towards prescribing capital  requirement for market risk, banks were advised to:
assign an additional risk weight of 2.5 per cent on the  entire investment portfolio;
Assign  a risk weight of 100 per cent on the open  position limits on foreign exchange and gold; and
build up Investment Fluctuation Reserve up to a minimum  of five per cent of the investments held in  Held for Trading and Available for Sale categories in the investment  portfolio.
2.2.2 Subsequently, keeping in view the ability of the banks to  identify and measure market risk, it was  decided to assign explicit capital charge for market risk. Thus banks are required to maintain capital charge for market  risk on securities included in the Held for  Trading and Available for Sale categories, open gold position, open forex position, trading positions in  derivatives and derivatives entered into for hedging trading book exposures.  Consequently, the additional risk weight of 2.5  per cent towards market risk on the investment included under Held for  Trading and Available for Sale categories is not required.
2.2.3 To begin with, capital charge for market  risks is applicable to banks on a global basis.  At a later stage, this would be extended to all groups where the controlling entity  is a bank.
2.2.4 Banks are required to manage the market risks in their  books on an ongoing basis and ensure that the  capital requirements for market risks are being met on a continuous  basis, i.e. at the close of each business day. Banks are also required to maintain strict risk management systems to monitor  and control intra-day exposures to market risks.
2.2.5. Capital Charge for Interest  Rate Risk
: The capital charge for interest  rate related instruments and equities would apply to current market  value of these items in bank’s trading book.  The current market value will be determined as per extant RBI guidelines on valuation of investments. The  minimum capital requirement is expressed in terms of two separate  capital charges i.e. S
pecific risk charge
for each security both for short and long  positions and G
eneral market risk charge
towards interest rate risk in the  portfolio where long and short positions in different securities or instruments can be offset. In India short  position is not allowed except in case of derivatives and Central  Government Securities. The banks have to  provide the capital charge for interest rate risk in the trading book other than derivatives as per the guidelines  given below for both
specific
risk
and
general  risk
after measuring the risk of holding or taking positions in debt  securities and other interest rate related instruments in the trading book.
2.2.5.1 Specific  Risk
:
This refers to risk of loss  caused by an adverse price movement of a  security principally due to factors related to the issuer. The specific risk  charge is designed to protect against  an adverse movement in the price of an individual security owing to factors related to the  individual issuer. The specific risk charge is graduated for various exposures under three heads, i.e. claims on  Government, claims on banks, claims  on others and is given in
Annex 7
.
2.2.5.2 General Market Risk:
The capital requirements for general market risk are  designed to capture the risk of loss arising from  changes in market interest rates. The capital charge is the sum  of four components:
the net short (short  position is not allowed in India except in derivatives and Central  Government Securities) or long position in the whole trading book;
a small proportion of  the matched positions in each time-band (the “vertical disallowance”);
a larger proportion of  the matched positions across different time-bands (the  “horizontal disallowance”), and
a net charge for  positions in options, where appropriate.
2.2.5.3 Computation of Capital Charge for Market Risk:
The  Basel Committee has suggested two broad  methodologies for computation of capital charge for market risks i.e. the Standardised method and the  banks’ Internal Risk Management models  (IRM) method. It has been decided that, to start with, banks may adopt the standardised method. Under the  standardised method there are two  principal methods of measuring market risk, a “maturity” method and a  “duration” method. As “duration” method is a more accurate method of measuring interest rate risk, it has been decided  to adopt Standardised Duration method  to arrive at the capital charge. Accordingly, banks are required to measure the general market risk charge by  calculating the price sensitivity (modified  duration) of each position separately. Under this method, the mechanics  are as follows:
first calculate the price  sensitivity (modified duration) of each instrument;
next apply the assumed  change in yield to the modified duration of each instrument  between 0.6 and 1.0 percentage points depending on the maturity  of the instrument as given in
Annex 7
;
slot the resulting  capital charge measures into a maturity ladder with the fifteen  time bands as set out in
Annex 7
;
subject long and short  positions (short position is not allowed in India except in derivatives and Central Government Securities)  in each time band to a 5 per cent vertical  disallowance designed to capture basis risk; and
carry forward the net  positions in each time-band for horizontal offsetting subject  to the disallowances set out in
Annex 8
.
2.2.5.4 Capital Charge for Interest Rate Derivatives:
The measurement of capital charge for market risks should  include all interest rate derivatives and  off-balance sheet instruments in the trading book and derivatives entered into for hedging trading book exposures which  would react to changes in the interest rates, like FRAs, interest rate  positions, etc. The details of measurement  of capital charge for interest rate derivatives and options are furnished  below.
2.2.5.5 Measurement system in respect of Interest  Rate Derivatives and Options
2.2.5.5.1 Interest Rate Derivatives
The measurement system should include all interest rate  derivatives and off-balance­ sheet instruments in  the trading book, which react to changes in interest rates, (e.g. forward rate agreements (FRAs), other forward contracts,  bond futures, interest rate and cross-currency  swaps and forward foreign exchange positions). Options can be treated in a  variety of ways as described at para 2.2.5.5.2 below. A summary of the rules  for dealing  with interest rate derivatives is set out at the end of this section.
2.2.5.5.1.1 Calculation  of positions
The derivatives should be converted into positions in the  relevant underlying and be subjected to specific and general market  risk charges as described in the guidelines. In order to calculate the capital charge, the amounts reported should be the  market value of the principal amount  of the underlying or of the notional underlying. For instruments where the apparent notional amount differs from the  effective notional amount, banks must use the effective notional amount.
Futures and forward contracts, including Forward Rate Agreements (FRA):
These instruments are treated as a combination of a long  and a short position in a notional government security. The  maturity of a future or a FRA will be the period until delivery or exercise of  the contract, plus - where applicable - the life of the underlying instrument.  For example, a long position in a June three-month interest rate future (taken in April) is to be reported as a long position in a  government security with a maturity of five  months and a short position in a government security with a maturity of two  months. Where a range of deliverable  instruments may be delivered to fulfill the contract, the bank has flexibility to elect which deliverable  security goes into the duration ladder but should take account of any  conversion factor defined by the exchange.
SWAP:
Swaps will be  treated as two notional positions in government securities with relevant maturities. For example, an interest rate swap  under which a bank is receiving floating rate interest and paying fixed will be treated as a long position in a  floating rate instrument of maturity equivalent to the period until the  next interest fixing and a short position in  a fixed-rate instrument of maturity equivalent to the residual life of the  swap. For swaps that pay or receive a  fixed or floating interest rate against some other reference price, e.g. a stock index, the interest  rate component should be slotted into the appropriate re-pricing maturity category, with the equity component  being included in the equity  framework. Separate legs of cross-currency swaps are to be reported in the relevant  maturity ladders for the currencies concerned.
2.2.5.5.1.2 Calculation of Capital Charges for Derivatives  under the Standardised Methodology:
i. Allowable  offsetting of matched positions
Banks may exclude the following from the interest rate  maturity framework altogether (for both specific and general market  risk);
Long and short  positions (both actual and notional) in identical instruments with exactly  the same issuer, coupon, currency and maturity.
A matched position in a future or forward and  its corresponding underlying may also be fully offset (the leg representing the  time to expiry of the future should however be reported) and thus excluded from  the calculation.
When the future or the forward comprises a range of  deliverable instruments, offsetting of  positions in the future or forward contract and its underlying is only  permissible in cases where there is a readily identifiable  underlying security which is most profitable for the trader with a short position to deliver. The price of this security,  sometimes called the "cheapest-to-deliver",  and the price of the future or forward contract should in such cases  move in close alignment.
No offsetting will be allowed between positions in  different currencies; the separate legs of  cross-currency swaps or forward foreign exchange deals are to be treated as  notional positions in the relevant instruments and included in the appropriate  calculation for each currency.
In addition, opposite positions in the same category of  instruments can in certain circumstances be  regarded as matched and allowed to offset fully. To qualify for this treatment the positions must relate to the same  underlying instruments, be of the same nominal value and be  denominated in the same currency. In addition:
for  futures: offsetting positions in the notional or underlying instruments to  which the futures contract relates must be  for identical products and mature within seven days of each other;
for swaps and FRAs: the reference rate (for floating  rate positions) must be identical and the coupon closely matched  (i.e. within 15 basis points); and
for swaps, FRAs and forwards: the  next interest fixing date or, for fixed coupon positions or forwards, the residual maturity must correspond within the  following limits:
less than one month hence: same day;
between one month and one year hence: within seven days;
over one year hence: within thirty days.
Banks  with large swap books may use alternative formulae for these swaps to calculate  the positions to be included in the duration  ladder. The method would be to calculate the sensitivity of the net present value implied by the change in yield used  in the duration method and allocate these sensitivities into the time-bands set  out in
Annex 7
.
ii. Specific Risk
Interest rate and currency swaps, FRAs, forward foreign  exchange contracts and interest rate futures will not be  subject to a specific risk charge. This exemption also applies to futures on an interest rate index (e.g. LIBOR).  However, in the case of futures contracts where the underlying is a debt security, or an index representing a  basket of debt securities, a specific risk charge will apply according  to the credit risk of the issuer as set out in paragraphs above.
iii. General Market Risk
General market risk applies to positions in all  derivative products in the same manner as for  cash positions, subject only to an exemption for fully or very closely matched positions in identical instruments as defined in  paragraphs above. The various categories  of instruments should be slotted into the maturity ladder and treated according  to the rules identified earlier.
Table  - Summary of treatment of interest rate derivatives
Instrument
Specific risk charge
General Market risk charge
Exchange-traded future   - Government debt security   - Corporate debt security - Index on interest rates (e.g. MIBOR)
No
Yes
No
Yes, as two positions
Yes, as two positions
Yes, as two positions
OTC    forward
- Government debt security
- Corporate debt security
- Index on interest rates (e.g. MIBOR)
No
Yes
No
Yes, as two positions
Yes, as two positions
Yes, as two positions
FRAs,    Swaps
No
Yes, as two positions
Forward Foreign Exchange
No
Yes, as one position in each currency
Options
- Government debt security
- Corporate debt security
- Index on interest rates (e.g. MIBOR)
-    FRAs, Swaps
No
Yes
No
No
2.2.5.5.2  Treatment of Options
In recognition of the  wide diversity of banks’ activities in options and the difficulties of measuring  price risk for options, alternative approaches are permissible as under:
those banks which  solely use purchased options
1
will be free to use the simplified approach described in  Section (a) below;
those banks which also  write options will be expected to use one of the intermediate approaches  as set out in Section (b) below.
a)  Simplified Approach
In the
simplified approach
, the positions  for the options and the associated underlying, cash or forward,  are not subject to the standardised methodology but rather are carved- out  and subject to separately calculated capital charges that incorporate both  general market risk and specific risk. The risk numbers thus  generated are then added to the capital charges for the  relevant category, i.e. interest rate related instruments, equities, and  foreign exchange as described in Sections 2.2.5 to 2.2.7 of this circular.  Banks which handle a limited range of purchased options only  will be free to use the simplified approach set out in Table  1, below for particular trades. As an example of how the calculation  would work, if a holder of 100 shares currently valued at
`
10 each holds an equivalent  put option with a strike price of
`
11, the capital charge would be:
`
1,000 x  18% (i.e. 9% specific plus 9% general market risk) =
`
180, less the amount the  option  is in the money (
`
11 –
`
10) x 100 =
`
100, i.e. the capital charge would be
`
80. A similar methodology applies for options  whose underlying is a foreign currency or an interest rate related  instrument.
Table-1 Simplified Approach: Capital Charges
Position
Treatment
Long    cash and Long put 
            or
Short cash and Long    call
The    capital charge will be the market value of the underlying    security
2
multiplied by the sum of specific and general market    risk charges
3
for    the underlying less the amount the option is in the money (if any) bounded    at zero
4
Position
Treatment
Long Call
or
Long put
The capital charge    will be the lesser of:
(i) the market value of the underlying security multiplied    by the sum of specific and general market risk charges
3
for the underlying
(ii) 
            the    market value of the option
5
b) Intermediate approaches
i. Delta-plus Method
The
delta-plus  method
uses the sensitivity parameters or "Greek letters"  associated with options to measure their  market risk and capital requirements. Under this method, the delta-equivalent  position of each option becomes part of the standardised methodology set out in Sections 2.2.5 to 2.2.7 with the  delta-equivalent amount subject to the applicable  general market risk charges. Separate capital charges are then applied to the gamma and vega risks of the option positions.  Banks which write options will be allowed to include delta-weighted options  positions within the standardised methodology set out in Sections 2.2.5 to 2.2.7. Such options should be  reported as a position equal to the market value of the underlying  multiplied by the delta.
However, since delta does not sufficiently cover the risks  associated with options positions, banks will also be required to  measure gamma (which measures the rate of change  of delta) and vega (which measures the sensitivity of the value of an option  with respect to a change in volatility) sensitivities in order to calculate the  total capital charge. These  sensitivities will be calculated according to an approved exchange model or to  the bank’s proprietary options  pricing model subject to oversight by the Reserve Bank of India
6
.
Delta-weighted positions with
debt securities or interest rates as the underlying
will be slotted into the interest rate time-bands, as set out in  Table at
Annex 7
under the following procedure. A  two-legged approach should be used as for other derivatives, requiring one entry at the time the underlying  contract takes effect and a second at the time the underlying contract matures. For instance, a bought call option  on a June three- month interest-rate  future will in April be considered, on the basis of its delta-equivalent value, to be a long position with a maturity of  five months and a short position with a maturity of two months
7
.  The written option will be similarly slotted as a long position with a maturity of two months and a short position with  a maturity of five months. Floating rate instruments with caps or floors  will be treated as a combination of floating rate securities and a series of European-style options. For  example, the holder of a three-year floating rate bond indexed to six  month LIBOR with a cap of 15% will treat it as:
a debt security that re prices in six months; and
a series of five written call options on a FRA with a  reference rate of 15%, each with a negative sign at the time the  underlying FRA takes effect and a positive  sign at the time the underlying FRA matures
8
.
The capital charge for
options with equities as the underlying
will also be based on  the delta-weighted positions which will be incorporated in the  measure of market risk described in Section  2.2.5. For purposes of this calculation each national market is to be treated as a separate underlying. The capital charge for
options on foreign exchange
and gold positions
will be based on the method set out in Section 2.2.7. For  delta risk, the net delta-based equivalent of the  foreign currency and gold options will be incorporated  into the measurement of the exposure for the respective currency (or gold) position.
In addition to the above capital charges arising from  delta risk, there will be further capital  charges for
gamma
and for
vega risk.
Banks using the delta-plus  method will be required to calculate the  gamma and vega for each option position (including hedge positions)  separately. The capital charges should be calculated in the following way:
a) for
each individual  option
a "gamma impact" should be calculated according  to a Taylor series expansion as :
Gamma impact = 1/2 x  Gamma x VU
2
where VU = Variation of the underlying of the  option.
(b) VU will be calculated as follows:
for interest rate  options if the underlying is a bond, the price sensitivity should be worked out as explained. An equivalent  calculation should be carried out where the underlying is an  interest rate.
for options on equities  and equity indices; which are not permitted at 
            present, the market value of the underlying should be  multiplied by 9%
9
;
for foreign exchange and  gold options: the market value of the underlying should be multiplied  by 9%;
(c) For the purpose of this calculation the following  positions should be treated as
the same underlyin
g:
for interest rates
10
,  each time-band as set out in
Annex 7
11
;
for equities and stock  indices, each national market;
for foreign currencies  and gold, each currency pair and gold;
(d) Each option on the same underlying will have a gamma  impact that is either positive or  negative. These individual gamma impacts will be summed,  resulting in a net gamma impact for each underlying that is either positive or negative. Only those net gamma impacts  that are negative will be included in the capital calculation.
(e) The total gamma capital charge will be the sum of the  absolute value of the net negative gamma impacts as calculated  above.
(f) For
volatility risk
,
banks will be required to calculate the capital charges by multiplying the sum of the vegas for all options on  the same underlying, as defined above, by a proportional shift in  volatility of ±25%.
(g) The
total capital  charge
for vega risk will be the sum of the absolute value of  the individual capital charges that have been calculated for vega risk.
ii Scenario  Approach
The
scenario  approach
uses simulation techniques to calculate changes in the  value of an options portfolio for changes in  the level and volatility of its associated underlying. Under  this approach, the general market risk charge is determined by the scenario  "grid" (i.e. the specified  combination of underlying and volatility changes) that produces the largest loss. For the delta-plus method and the  scenario approach the specific risk capital  charges are determined separately by multiplying the delta-equivalent of each option  by the specific risk weights set out in Section 2.2.5 and Section 2.2.6.
More sophisticated banks will also have the right to base  the market risk capital charge 
        for  options portfolios and associated hedging positions on
scenario matrix analysi
s. This will be accomplished by specifying a fixed range  of changes in the option portfolio’s risk factors and calculating changes in the value of the option portfolio at  various points along this  "grid". For the purpose of calculating the capital charge, the bank  will revalue the option portfolio  using matrices for simultaneous changes in the option’s underlying rate or price and in the volatility of that rate  or price. A different matrix will be set up for each individual underlying as defined in the preceding paragraph. As an  alternative, at the discretion of each national authority, banks which are  significant traders in options for  interest rate options will be permitted to base the calculation on a minimum of  six sets of time-bands. When using this  method, not more than three of the time-bands as defined in Section  2.2.5 should be combined into any one set.
The options and related hedging positions will be  evaluated over a specified range above  and below the current value of the underlying. The range for interest rates is consistent with the assumed changes in yield in
Annex 7
.  Those banks using the alternative method for  interest rate options set out in the preceding paragraph should use, for each set of time-bands, the highest of the  assumed changes in yield applicable to the group to which the time-bands  belong.
12
The other ranges are ±9 % for equities and ±9  % for foreign exchange and gold. For all risk categories, at least seven observations (including the current observation) should  be used to divide the range into equally spaced intervals.
The second dimension of the matrix entails a change in the  volatility of the underlying rate or price. A single change in the volatility  of the underlying rate or price equal to a shift in  volatility of + 25% and - 25% is expected to be sufficient in most cases. As circumstances warrant, however, the Reserve Bank may  choose to require that a different change in  volatility be used and / or that intermediate points on the grid be calculated.
After calculating the matrix, each cell contains the net  profit or loss of the option and the underlying  hedge instrument. The capital charge for each underlying will then be calculated  as the largest loss contained in the matrix.
In drawing up these intermediate approaches it has been  sought to cover the major risks associated with options. In doing  so, it is conscious that so far as specific risk is concerned, only the  delta-related elements are captured; to capture other risks would necessitate a much more complex regime. On the  other hand, in other areas the simplifying  assumptions used have resulted in a relatively conservative treatment of certain  options positions.
Besides the options risks mentioned above, the RBI is  conscious of the other risks also associated with options,  e.g. rho (rate of change of the value of the option with respect to the interest rate) and theta (rate of change of the  value of the option with respect to time). While not proposing a  measurement system for those risks at present, it expects banks undertaking significant options business at  the very least to monitor such risks closely.  Additionally, banks will be permitted to incorporate rho into their capital calculations  for interest rate risk, if they wish to do so.
2.2.6 Measurement of Capital Charge  for Equity Risk
Minimum  capital requirement to cover the risk of holding or taking positions in  equities in the trading book is set out below. This is applied to all  instruments that exhibit market behaviour  similar to equities but not to non-convertible preference shares (which are covered by the interest rate risk requirements  described earlier). The instruments covered include equity shares,  whether voting or non-voting, convertible securities that behave like equities, for example: units of mutual  funds, and commitments to buy or sell equity.  Capital charge for specific risk (akin to credit risk) will be 11.25% and  specific risk is computed on the  banks’ gross equity positions (i.e. the sum of all long equity positions and of all short equity positions –  short equity position is, however, not allowed for banks in India). The general market risk charge will also be 9% on  the gross equity positions.
Investments in shares and /units of VCFs may be assigned  150% risk weight for measuring the credit risk  during first three years when these are held under HTM category. When these are held under or transferred to  AFS, the capital charge for specific risk  component of the market risk as required in terms of the present guidelines on computation of capital charge for market risk, may be  fixed at 13.5% to reflect the risk weight  of 150%. The charge for general market risk component would be at 9% as in the case  of other equities.
2.2.7 Measurement of Capital Charge  for foreign exchange and gold open positions
Foreign exchange open  positions and gold open positions are at present risk weighted at 100%. Thus, capital charge for foreign exchange and gold  open position is 9% at present. These open  positions, limits or actual whichever is higher, would continue to attract  capital charge at 9%. This is in line with the Basel Committee requirement.
2.3 Capital Charge for  Credit Default Swaps (CDS)
2.3.1 Capital Adequacy  Requirement for CDS Positions in the Banking Book
2.3.1.1 Recognition of External /  Third-party CDS Hedges
2.3.1.1.1 In case of Banking  Book positions hedged by bought CDS positions, no exposure will be reckoned  against the reference entity / underlying asset in respect of the hedged  exposure, and exposure will be deemed to have been substituted by the  protection seller, if the following conditions are satisfied:
(a) Operational requirements mentioned in paragraph 4 of the  Prudential Guidelines on CDS are met;
(b) The risk weight applicable to the protection seller under the  Basel II Standardised Approach for credit risk is lower than that of the  underlying asset; and
(c) There is no maturity mismatch between the underlying asset  and the reference / deliverable obligation. If this condition is not satisfied,  then the amount of credit protection to be recognised should be computed as  indicated in
paragraph 2.3.1.1.3(ii)
below.
2.3.1.1.2 If the conditions  (a) and (b) above are not satisfied or the bank breaches any of these  conditions subsequently, the bank shall reckon the exposure on the underlying  asset; and the CDS position will be transferred to Trading Book where it will  be subject to specific risk, counterparty credit risk and general market risk  (wherever applicable) capital requirements as applicable to Trading Book.
2.3.1.1.3 The unprotected  portion of the underlying exposure should be risk-weighted as applicable under  Basel II framework. The amount of credit protection shall be adjusted if there  are any mismatches between the underlying asset/ obligation and the reference /  deliverable asset / obligation with regard to asset or maturity. These are  dealt with in detail in the following paragraphs.
(i) Asset Mismatches
Asset mismatch will arise if the underlying asset is different  from the reference asset or deliverable obligation. Protection will be reckoned  as available by the protection buyer only if the mismatched assets meet the  requirements specified in
paragraph 4(k)
of the Prudential Guidelines on  CDS.
(ii) Maturity  Mismatches
The protection buyer would  be eligible to reckon the amount of protection if the maturity of the credit  derivative contract were to be equal or more than the maturity of the  underlying asset. If, however, the maturity of the CDS contract is less than  the maturity of the underlying asset, then it would be construed as a maturity  mismatch. In case of maturity mismatch the amount of protection will be  determined in the following manner:
a. If the residual maturity of the credit derivative product is  less than
three months
no protection will be recognized.
b. If the residual maturity of the credit derivative contract is
three  months
or more protection proportional to the period for which it is  available will be recognised. When there is a maturity mismatch the following  adjustment will be applied.
Pa = P x (t - 0.25) ÷ (T - 0.25)
Where:
Pa = value of the credit protection adjusted  for maturity mismatch
P = credit protection
t = min (T, residual maturity of the credit protection  arrangement) expressed in years
T = min (5, residual maturity of the  underlying exposure) expressed in years
Example:
Suppose the underlying asset is  a corporate bond of Face Value of
`
100 where the residual maturity is of 5  years and the residual maturity of the CDS is 4 years. The amount of credit  protection is computed as under :
100 * {(4 - 0.25) ÷ (5 - 0.25)} = 100*(3.75÷ 4.75) = 78.95
c. Once the residual maturity of the CDS contract reaches
three  months
, protection ceases to be recognised.
2.3.1.2 Internal Hedges
Banks can use CDS contracts to hedge against the credit risk in  their existing corporate bonds portfolios. A bank can hedge a Banking Book  credit risk exposure either by an internal hedge (the protection purchased from  the trading desk of the bank and held in the Trading Book) or an external hedge  (protection purchased from an eligible third party protection provider). When a  bank hedges a Banking Book credit risk exposure (corporate bonds) using a CDS  booked in its Trading Book (i.e. using an internal hedge), the Banking Book  exposure is not deemed to be hedged for capital purposes unless the bank  transfers the credit risk from the Trading Book to an eligible third party  protection provider through a CDS meeting the requirements of
paragraph  2.3.1
vis-à-vis the Banking Book exposure. Where such third party  protection is purchased and is recognised as a hedge of a Banking Book exposure  for regulatory capital purposes, no capital is required to be maintained on  internal and external CDS hedge. In such cases, the external CDS will act as  indirect hedge for the Banking Book exposure and the capital adequacy in terms of  paragraph 2.3.1, as applicable for external/ third party hedges, will be  applicable.
2.3.2 Capital Adequacy for  CDS in the Trading Book
2.3.2.1 General  Market Risk
A credit default swap does not normally create a position for  general market risk for either the protection buyer or protection seller.  However, the present value of premium payable / receivable is sensitive to  changes in the interest rates. In order to measure the interest rate risk in  premium receivable / payable, the present value of the premium can be treated  as a notional position in Government securities of relevant maturity. These  positions will attract appropriate capital charge for general market risk. The  protection buyer / seller will treat the present value of the premium payable /  receivable equivalent to a short / long notional position in Government  securities of relevant maturity.
2.3.2.2 Specific Risk for  Exposure to Reference Entity
A CDS creates a notional long/short position for specific risk in  the reference asset/ obligation for protection seller/protection buyer. For  calculating specific risk capital charge, the notional amount of the CDS and  its maturity should be used. The specific risk capital charge for CDS positions  will be as per
Tables
below.
Specific Risk Capital Charges for bought and
sold CDS positions in the Trading Book : Exposures to entities
other than Commercial Real Estate Companies / NBFC-ND-SI
Up to 90 days
After 90 days
Ratings by the ECAI*
Residual Maturity of the instrument
Capital charge
Ratings by the ECAI*
Capital charge
AAA to BBB
6    months or less
0.28%
AAA
1.8 %
Greater    than 6 months and up to and including 24 months
1.14%
AA
2.7%
Exceeding    24 months
1.80%
A
4.5%
BBB
9.0%
BB and below
All    maturities
13.5%
BB and below
13.5%
Unrated
(if    permitted)
All    maturities
9.0%
Unrated
(if    permitted)
9.0%
* These  ratings indicate the ratings assigned by Indian rating agencies / ECAIs or  foreign rating agencies. In the case of foreign ECAIs, the rating symbols used  here correspond to Standard and Poor. The modifiers "+" or  "-" have been subsumed within the main category.
Specific    Risk Capital Charges for bought and sold CDS positions in the Trading Book :    Exposures to Commercial Real Estate Companies / NBFC-ND-SI#
Ratings    by the ECAI*
Residual    Maturity of the instrument
Capital    charge
AAA to BBB
6 months or less
1.4%
Greater than 6 months and up to and including 24 months
7.7%
Exceeding 24 months
9.0%
BB and below
All maturities
9.0%
Unrated (if permitted)
All maturities
9.0%
# The above table will be applicable for  exposures up to 90 days. Capital charge for exposures to Commercial Real Estate  Companies/NBFC-ND-SI beyond 90 days shall be taken at 9.0%, regardless of  rating of the reference/deliverable obligation.
* These ratings indicate the ratings  assigned by Indian rating agencies/ECAIs or foreign rating agencies. In the  case of foreign ECAIs, the rating symbols used here correspond to Standard and  Poor. The modifiers "+" or "-" have been subsumed within  the main category.
2.3.2.2.1 Specific Risk  Capital Charges for Positions Hedged by CDS
(i) Banks may fully offset the specific risk capital charges when the  values of two legs (i.e. long and short in CDS positions) always move in the  opposite direction and broadly to the same extent. This would be the case when  the two legs consist of
completely identical CDS
. In these cases, no  specific risk capital requirement applies to both sides of the CDS positions.
(ii) Banks may offset 80 per cent of the specific risk capital charges  when the value of two legs (i.e. long and short) always moves in the opposite  direction but not broadly to the same extent. This would be the case when a  long cash position is hedged by a credit default swap and there is an exact  match in terms of the reference / deliverable obligation, and the maturity of  both the reference / deliverable obligation and the CDS. In addition, key  features of the CDS (e.g. credit event definitions, settlement mechanisms)  should not cause the price movement of the CDS to materially deviate from the  price movements of the cash position. To the extent that the transaction  transfers risk, an 80% specific risk offset will be applied to the side of the  transaction with the higher capital charge, while the specific risk requirement  on the other side will be zero.
(iii) Banks may offset partially the specific risk capital charges when  the value of the two legs (i.e. long and short) usually moves in the opposite  direction. This would be the case in the following situations:
(a) The position is captured in
paragraph 2.3.2.2.1(ii)
but  there is an asset mismatch between the cash position and the CDS. However, the  underlying asset is included in the (reference / deliverable) obligations in  the CDS documentation and meets the requirements of
paragraph 4(k) of Prudential  Guidelines on CDS
.
(b) The position is captured in paragraph 2.3.2.2.1 (ii) but there is  maturity mismatch between credit protection and the underlying asset. However,  the underlying asset is included in the (reference / deliverable) obligations  in the CDS documentation.
(c) In each of the cases in paragraph (a) and (b) above, rather than  applying specific risk capital requirements on each side of the transaction  (i.e. the credit protection and the underlying asset), only higher of the two  capital requirements will apply.
2.3.2.2.2 Specific Risk  Charge in CDS Positions which are not meant for Hedging
In cases not captured in
paragraph 2.3.2.2.1
, a specific  risk capital charge will be assessed against both sides of the positions.
2.3.3 Capital Charge for Counterparty Credit Risk
The credit exposure for the purpose of  counterparty credit risk on account of CDS transactions in the Trading Book  will be calculated according to the Current Exposure Method under Basel II  framework.
2.3.3.1 Protection Seller
A protection seller will have exposure to the protection buyer  only if the fee / premia are outstanding. In such cases, the counterparty  credit risk charge for all single name long CDS positions in the Trading Book  will be calculated as the sum of the current marked-to-market value, if  positive (zero, if marked-to-market value is negative) and the potential future  exposure add-on factors based on table given below. However, the add-on will be  capped to the amount of unpaid premia.
Add-on Factors for Protection Sellers
(As % of Notional Principal of CDS)
Type of    Reference Obligation
Add-on Factor
Obligations rated BBB- and above
10%
Below BBB- and unrated
20%
2.3.3.2 Protection Buyer
A CDS contract creates a counterparty exposure on the protection  seller on account of the credit event payment. The counterparty credit risk  charge for all short CDS positions in the Trading Book will be calculated as  the sum of the current marked-to-market value, if positive (zero, if  marked-to-market value is negative) and the potential future exposure add-on  factors based on table given below
Add-on Factors for Protection Buyers
(As % of Notional Principal of CDS)
Type of    Reference Obligation
Add-on Factor
Obligations rated BBB- and above
10%
Below BBB- and unrated
20%
2.3.3.3 Capital Charge for  Counterparty Risk for Collateralised Transactions in CDS
As mentioned in
paragraph 3.3
of the circular  IDMD.PCD.No.5053/14.03.04/2010-11 dated May 23, 2011, collaterals and margins  would be maintained by the individual market participants. The counterparty  exposure for CDS traded in the OTC market will be calculated as per the Current  Exposure Method. Under this method, the calculation of the counterparty credit  risk charge for an individual contract, taking into account the collateral,  will be as follows:
Counterparty risk capital charge = [(RC + add-on) – CA] x r x 9%
where:
RC = the replacement cost,
add-on = the amount for potential future exposure calculated  according to
paragraph 7
above.
CA = the volatility adjusted amount of eligible collateral under  the comprehensive approach prescribed in
paragraphs 7.3
"Credit  Risk Mitigation Techniques - Collateralised Transactions" of the Master  Circular on New Capital Adequacy Framework dated July 2, 2012, or zero if no  eligible collateral is applied to the transaction, and
r = the risk weight of the counterparty.
2.3.4 Treatment of  Exposures below Materiality Thresholds
Materiality thresholds on  payments below which no payment is made in the event of loss are equivalent to  retained first loss positions and should be assigned risk weight of 1111% for  capital adequacy purpose by the protection buyer.
2.4 Capital  Charge for Subsidiaries
2.4.1 The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision has proposed that  the New Capital Adequacy Framework should be extended to include, on a  consolidated basis, holding companies that  are parents of banking groups. On prudential considerations, it is necessary to adopt best practices in line with  international standards, while duly reflecting local conditions.
2.4.2 Accordingly,  banks may voluntarily build-in the risk weighted components of their subsidiaries  into their own balance sheet on notional basis, at par with the risk weights  applicable to the bank's own assets. Banks should earmark additional capital in their books over a period of time so as  to obviate the possibility of impairment  to their net worth when switchover to unified balance sheet for the group as a whole is adopted after sometime. Thus  banks were asked to provide additional  capital in their books in phases, beginning from the year ended March 2001.
2.4.3 A  consolidated bank defined as a group of entities which include a licensed bank should maintain a minimum Capital to Risk-weighted Assets  Ratio (CRAR) as applicable to the parent bank on an ongoing basis.  While computing capital funds, parent bank  may consider the following points:
Banks are required to maintain a minimum capital to risk  weighted assets ratio of 9%. Non-bank subsidiaries are required to maintain the  capital adequacy ratio prescribed by their respective regulators. In case of  any shortfall in the capital adequacy ratio of any of the subsidiaries, the  parent should maintain capital in addition  to its own regulatory requirements to cover the shortfall.
Risks inherent in deconsolidated entities (i.e., entities  which are not consolidated in the Consolidated  Prudential Reports) in the group need to be assessed and any shortfall in the regulatory capital in the deconsolidated  entities should be deducted (in equal  proportion from Tier I and Tier II capital) from the consolidated bank's capital in the proportion of its equity stake in the  entity.
2.5 Procedure for computation of CRAR
2.5.1 While calculating the aggregate of funded and non-funded  exposure of a borrower for the purpose of  assignment of risk weight, banks may ‘net-off’ against the total  outstanding exposure of the borrower -
advances collateralised by cash margins or deposits;
credit balances in current or other accounts which are not  earmarked for specific purposes and free from any lien;
in respect of any assets where provisions for  depreciation or for bad debts have been made;
claims  received from DICGC/ ECGC and kept in a separate account pending adjustment;  and
subsidies received against advances in respect of  Government sponsored schemes and kept in a  separate account.
2.5.2 After applying the conversion factor as indicated  in Annex 9
,
the adjusted off Balance Sheet value shall again be multiplied by the risk  weight attributable to the relevant counter-party as specified.
2.5.3  Computation of CRAR for Foreign Exchange Contracts and Gold
: Foreign exchange  contracts include- Cross currency interest rate swaps, Forward foreign exchange  contracts, Currency futures, Currency options purchased, and other contracts of  a similar nature
Foreign exchange contracts with an original  maturity of 14 calendar days or less, irrespective  of the counterparty, may be assigned "zero" risk weight as per international  practice.
As in the case of other  off-Balance Sheet items, a two stage calculation prescribed below  shall be applied:
(a) Step  1 - The notional principal amount of each instrument is multiplied by the conversion  factor given below:
Residual Maturity
Conversion Factor
One year or less
2%
Over one year to five years
10%
Over five years
15%
(b) Step  2 - The adjusted value thus obtained shall be multiplied by the risk weight age  allotted to the relevant counter-party as given in Step 2 in section D of
Annex  9
.
2.5.4 Computation of CRAR for Interest Rate  related Contracts:
Interest rate contracts  include the Single currency interest rate swaps, Basis swaps, Forward rate agreements, Interest rate futures, Interest  rate options purchased and other contracts of  a similar nature. As in the case of other off-Balance Sheet items, a two stage  calculation prescribed below shall be applied:
(a) Step  1 - The notional principal amount of each instrument is multiplied by the  percentages given below
:
Residual    Maturity
Conversion    Factor
One    year or less
0.5%
Over one year to five years
1.0%
Over five years
3.0%
(b) Step 2 -The  adjusted value thus obtained shall be multiplied by the risk weightage allotted to the relevant counter-party as  given in Step 2 in Section I.D. of
Annex 9
.
2.5.5 Aggregation of Capital Charge for Market Risks
The capital charges for  specific risk and general market risk are to be computed separately before aggregation. For computing the total  capital charge for market risks, the calculations may be  plotted in the proforma as depicted in
Table 2
below.
Table-2: Total Capital Charge for Market Risk
(
`
in crore)
Risk Category
Capital charge
I. Interest Rate    (a+b)
a.    General market risk
Net position (parallel shift)
Horizontal disallowance (curvature)
Vertical disallowance (basis)
Options
b.    Specific risk
II. Equity (a+b)
General    market risk
Specific    risk
III. Foreign    Exchange & Gold
IV. Total capital    charge for market risks (I+II+III)
2.5.6 Calculation of total risk-weighted  assets and capital ratio:
Following steps may be followed for calculation of total risk weighted  assets and capital ratio:
2.5.6.1 Arrive at the risk weighted assets for  credit risk in the banking book and for counterparty credit risk on all OTC  derivatives.
2.5.6.2 Convert the capital  charge for market risk to notional risk weighted assets by multiplying the  capital charge arrived at as above in Proforma by 100 ÷ 9 [the present requirement of CRAR is 9% and hence  notional risk weighted assets are arrived at by  multiplying the capital charge by (100 ÷ 9)]
2.5.6.3 Add the  risk-weighted assets for credit risk as at 2.5.6.1 above and notional risk-weighted assets of trading book as at 2.5.6.2  above to arrive at total risk weighted assets for the bank.
2.5.6.4 Compute capital  ratio on the basis of regulatory capital maintained and risk-weighted  assets.
2.5.7 Computation of Capital available for Market  Risk:
Capital  required for supporting credit risk should be deducted from total capital funds  to arrive at capital available for  supporting market risk as illustrated in
Table 3
below.
Table-3:  Computation of Capital for Market Risk
(
`
in crore)
1
Capital    funds
105
Tier I capital ---------------------------
55
Tier II capital --------------------------
50
2
Total    risk weighted assets
1140
RWA for credit risk-------------------
1000
RWA for market risk-----------------
140
3
Total    CRAR
9.21
4
Minimum    capital required to support credit risk (1000*9%)
90
Tier I - 45 (@ 4.5% of 1000)-------
45
Tier II - 45 (@ 4.5% of 1000)------
45
5
Capital    available to support market risk (105 - 90)
15
Tier I - (55 - 45)----------------------
10
Tier II - (50 - 45)---------------------
5
2.5.8 Worked out Examples:
Two examples for computing capital charge for market risk  and credit risk are given in Annex 10.
ANNEX 1
Guidelines on Perpetual Non-Cumulative Preference Shares  (PNCPS)
as part of Tier I capital
1. Terms of Issue
1.1. Limits
The outstanding amount of Tier I Preference Shares along  with Innovative Tier 1 instruments shall not  exceed 40 per cent of total Tier I capital at any point of time. The above limit will be based on the amount of Tier I capital  after deduction of goodwill and other intangible  assets but before the deduction of investments. Tier I Preference Shares issued  in excess of the overall ceiling of 40 per cent shall be eligible for inclusion  under Upper Tier II capital, subject to  limits prescribed for Tier II capital. However, investors' rights and  obligations would remain unchanged.
1.2. Amount
The  amount of PNCPS to be raised may be decided by the Board of Directors of banks.
1.3. Maturity
The  PNCPS shall be perpetual.
1.4. Options
(i) PNCPS
shall not
be issued with a 'put option'  or ‘step up option'.
(ii) However, banks may issue the instruments with  a call option at a particular date subject to following conditions:
The call option on the instrument is permissible after  the instrument has run for at least ten years; and
Call option shall be exercised only with the prior  approval of RBI (Department of Banking Operations  & Development). While considering the proposals received from banks for exercising the call option the RBI would, among  other things, take into consideration the bank's  CRAR position both at the time of exercise of the call option and  after exercise of the call option.
1.5. Dividend
The rate of dividend payable to the investors may be  either a fixed rate or a floating rate referenced to a market  determined rupee interest benchmark rate.
1.6. Payment of  Dividend
(a) The issuing bank shall pay dividend subject to  availability of distributable surplus out of current year's  earnings, and if
The bank's CRAR is above the minimum regulatory  requirement prescribed by RBI;
The impact of such payment does not result in bank's  capital to risk weighted assets ratio  (CRAR) falling below or remaining below the minimum regulatory requirement prescribed by Reserve Bank of India;
In  the case of half yearly payment of dividends, the balance sheet as at the end  of the previous year does not show any accumulated losses; and
In  the case of annual payment of dividends, the current year's balance sheet does  not show any accumulated losses
(b) The dividend shall not be cumulative. i.e., dividend  missed in a year will not be paid in future years, even if adequate profit is  available and the level of CRAR conforms to the regulatory minimum. When  dividend is paid at a rate lesser than the prescribed rate, the unpaid amount will not be paid in future years,  even if adequate profit is available and the level of CRAR conforms to  the regulatory minimum.
(c) All instances of non-payment of dividend/payment of  dividend at a lesser rate than prescribed in  consequence of conditions as at (a) above should be reported by the issuing  banks to the Chief General Managers-in-Charge of Department of Banking Operations & Development and Department of Banking  Supervision, Central Office of the Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai.
1.7 Seniority of Claim
The claims of the investors in PNCPS shall be senior to  the claims of investors in equity shares and subordinated to  the claims of all other creditors and the depositors.
1.8 Other  Conditions
(a) PNCPS should be fully paid-up, unsecured, and free of any  restrictive clauses.
(b) Investment by FIIs and NRIs shall be within an overall  limit of 49 per cent and 24 per cent of the issue  respectively, subject to the investment by each FII not exceeding 10 per cent  of the issue and investment by each NRI not  exceeding 5 per cent of the issue. Investment by FIIs in these instruments shall be outside the ECB limit for rupee denominated  corporate debt as fixed by Government of India  from time to time. The overall non-resident holding of Preference Shares and equity shares in public sector banks will be  subject to the statutory / regulatory limit.
(c) Banks should comply with the terms and conditions, if  any, stipulated by SEBI / other regulatory authorities in regard  to issue of the instruments.
2. Compliance  with Reserve Requirements
(a) The funds collected by various branches of the bank or  other banks for the issue and held pending  finalisation of allotment of the Tier I Preference Shares will have to be taken  into account for the purpose of calculating reserve requirements.
(b) However, the total amount raised by the bank by issue of  PNCPS shall not be reckoned as liability  for calculation of net demand and time liabilities for the purpose of reserve  requirements and, as such, will not attract CRR / SLR requirements.
3. Reporting  Requirements
3.1 Banks issuing  PNCPS shall submit a report to the Chief General Manager-in-­charge, Department of Banking Operations &  Development, Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai giving details of the capital  raised, including the terms of issue specified at item 1  above together with a copy of the offer document soon after the issue is  completed.
3.2 The issue-wise  details of amount raised as PNCPS qualifying for Tier I capital by the  bank from FIIs / NRIs are required to be reported within 30 days of the issue  to the Chief General Manager, Reserve Bank  of India, Foreign Exchange Department, Foreign Investment Division,  Central Office, Mumbai 400 001 in the proforma given at the end of this
Annex
. The details of the secondary  market sales / purchases by FIIs and the NRIs in  these instruments on the floor of the stock exchange shall be reported by the custodians and designated banks, respectively to  the Reserve Bank of India through the soft  copy of the LEC Returns, on a daily basis, as prescribed in Schedule 2 and 3 of  the FEMA Notification No.20 dated 3rd May 2000, as amended from time to  time.
4. Investment in Perpetual Non-Cumulative Preference  Shares issued by other banks/FIs
(a) A  bank's investment in PNCPS issued by other banks and financial institutions  will be reckoned along with the investment  in other instruments eligible for capital status while computing compliance with the overall ceiling of 10 per cent of  investing banks' capital funds as  prescribed vide circular DBOD.BP.BC.No.3/ 21.01.002/ 2004-05 dated 6th  July 2004.
(b) Bank's investments in PNCPS issued by other banks /  financial institutions will attract a 100 per cent risk weight for  capital adequacy purposes.
(c) A bank's investments in the PNCPS of other banks will be  treated as exposure to capital market and be reckoned for the  purpose of compliance with the prudential ceiling for capital market exposure  as fixed by RBI.
5. Grant of Advances against Tier I Preference Shares
Banks  should not grant advances against the security of the PNCPS issued by them.
6. Classification in the Balance sheet
These instruments will be classified as capital and shown  under 'Schedule I-Capital' of the Balance sheet.
Reporting Format
(Cf. para 3(2) of
Annex – 1
)
Details of  Investments by FIIs and NRIs in Perpetual Non-Cumulative Preference
Shares qualifying as Tier-I Capital
(a) Name of the bank :
(b) 
      Total issue size / amount raised (in Rupees) :
(c) 
      Date of issue :
FIIs
NRIs
No    of FIIs
Amount    raised
No.    of NRIs
Amount    raised
in    Rupees
as a percentage of the total issue size
in    Rupees
as a percentage of the total issue size
It  is certified that
the aggregate  investment by all FIIs does not exceed 49 per cent of the issue size  and investment by no individual FII exceeds 10 per cent of the issue size.
It is certified that the aggregate investment  by all NRIs does not exceed 24 per cent of  the issue size and investment by no individual NRI exceeds 5 per cent of the  issue size.
Authorised Signatory
Date
Seal  of the bank
ANNEX - 2
Terms  and Conditions applicable to Innovative Perpetual Debt
Instruments  (IPDI) to qualify for Inclusion as Tier I Capital
The Innovative Perpetual Debt Instruments (Innovative  Instruments) that may be issued as bonds or debentures by Indian banks should  meet the following terms and conditions to qualify for inclusion as  Tier I Capital for capital adequacy purposes:
1. Terms of Issue of  innovative instruments denominated in Indian Rupees
(i) Amount
: The amount of innovative instruments  to be raised may be decided by the Board of Directors of banks.
(ii)
Limits
:The total amount raised by a bank through innovative  instruments shall not exceed 15 per cent  of total Tier I Capital. The eligible amount will be computed  with reference to the amount of Tier I Capital as on March 31 of the previous financial year, after deduction of  goodwill, DTA and other intangible assets  but before the deduction of investments, as required in paragraph 4.4. Innovative instruments in excess of the above  limits shall be eligible for inclusion under Tier II, subject to limits  prescribed for Tier II capital. However, investors’ rights and obligations  would remain unchanged.
(iii)
Maturity period
:
The innovative  instruments shall be perpetual.
(iv)
Rate of interest
:
The interest payable to the investors may be either at a  fixed rate or at a floating rate referenced to a market  determined rupee interest benchmark rate.
(v)
Options
:Innovative instruments shall not be issued with  a ‘put option’ or a ‘step-up option’. However banks  may issue the instruments with a call option subject to strict compliance with  each of the following conditions:
(a) Call option may be  exercised after the instrument has run for at least ten years;  and
(b) Call option shall be  exercised only with the prior approval of RBI (Department  of Banking Operations & Development). While considering the proposals received from banks for exercising the  call option the RBI would, among other things,  take into consideration the bank’s CRAR position both at the time of exercise of the call option and after  exercise of the call option.
(vi)
Lock-In Clause
:
(a) Innovative instruments  shall be subjected to a lock-in clause in terms of which  the issuing bank shall not be liable to pay interest, if
the  bank’s CRAR is below the minimum regulatory requirement prescribed by RBI; OR
the impact of such payment results in bank’s capital to  risk assets ratio (CRAR) falling below or  remaining below the minimum regulatory requirement prescribed by  Reserve Bank of India;
(b) However, banks may pay  interest with the prior approval of RBI when the impact  of such payment may result in net loss or increase the net loss, provided  the CRAR remains above the regulatory norm.
(c) The interest shall not  be cumulative.
(d) All instances of  invocation of the lock-in clause should be notified by the issuing banks to the Chief General Managers-in-Charge of  Department of Banking Operations & Development and Department of Banking  Supervision of the Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai.
(vii)
Seniority of  claim:
The claims of the investors in innovative instruments  shall be:
(a) Superior to the claims of  investors in equity shares; and
(b) Subordinated to the  claims of all other creditors.
(viii) Discount
: The innovative instruments shall not be subjected to a  progressive discount for capital adequacy purposes since these are  perpetual.
(ix)
Other  conditions
(a) Innovative instruments  should be fully paid-up, unsecured, and free 
        of  any restrictive clauses.
(b) Investment by FIIs in  innovative instruments raised in Indian Rupees 
        shall be outside the ECB limit for rupee denominated  corporate debt, as fixed by the Govt. of  India from time to time, for investment by FIIs in corporate debt instruments. Investment in these  instruments by FIIs and NRIs shall be within an overall limit of 49  per cent and 24 per cent of the issue,  respectively, subject to the investment by each FII not exceeding 10 per cent of the issue and investment by each NRI  not exceeding five per cent of the issue.
(c) Banks should comply with  the terms and conditions, if any, stipulated 
        by  SEBI / other regulatory authorities in regard to issue of the instruments.
2. Terms of issue of  innovative instruments denominated in foreign currency
Banks  may augment their capital funds through the issue of innovative instruments in foreign currency without seeking the prior  approval of the Reserve Bank of India, subject to compliance with the  under-mentioned requirements:
i) Innovative instruments  issued in foreign currency should comply with all terms and  conditions as applicable to the instruments issued in Indian Rupees.
ii) Not more than 49 per cent of the eligible amount can be  issued in foreign currency.
iii) Innovative instruments issued in foreign currency shall  be outside the limits for foreign currency borrowings indicated  below:
a) The total amount of Upper Tier II Instruments issued in  foreign currency shall not exceed 25 per  cent of the unimpaired Tier I capital. This eligible amount will be computed with reference to the amount of  Tier I capital as on March 31 of the  previous financial year, after deduction of goodwill and other intangible assets but before the deduction of  investments, as per para 2.1.4.2(a) of this  Master Circular.
b) This will be in addition to the existing limit for  foreign currency borrowings by Authorised  Dealers, stipulated in terms of Master Circular on  Risk Management and Inter-Bank Dealings.
3. Compliance with Reserve requirements
The  total amount raised by a bank through innovative instruments shall not be  reckoned as liability for calculation of  net demand and time liabilities for the purpose of reserve requirements  and, as such, will not attract CRR / SLR requirements.
4. Reporting  requirements
Banks issuing innovative instruments shall submit a report  to the Chief General Manager-in-charge, Department of Banking Operations & Development, Reserve Bank of India,  Mumbai giving details of the debt raised, including the terms of issue  specified at para 1 above , together with a  copy of the offer document soon after the issue is completed.
5. Investment  in IPDIs issued by other banks/ FIs
A bank's investment in innovative instruments issued by  other banks and financial institutions  will be reckoned along with the investment in other instruments eligible for capital status while computing compliance  with the overall ceiling of 10 percent for cross  holding of capital among banks/FIs prescribed vide circular DBOD.BP.BC.No.3/ 21 .01 .002/ 2004-05 dated 6th July 2004  and also subject to cross holding limits.
Bank's investments in innovative instruments issued by  other banks will attract risk weight for capital  adequacy purposes, as prescribed in paragraph 2.1.6(iv) of this Master Circular.
6. Grant of  advances against innovative instruments
Banks should not grant advances against the security of  the innovative instruments issued by them.
7.  Classification in the Balance Sheet
Banks may indicate the  amount raised by issue of IPDI in the Balance Sheet under schedule 4 “Borrowings”.
ANNEX - 3
Terms  and conditions applicable to Debt Capital Instruments to qualify for inclusion  as Upper Tier II Capital
The debt capital instruments that may be issued as bonds /  debentures by Indian banks should meet the  following terms and conditions to qualify for inclusion as Upper  Tier II Capital for capital adequacy purposes.
1. Terms of issue of Upper Tier II Capital Instruments
i. Currency of issue: Banks shall issue Upper Tier II Instruments in Indian  Rupees. Instruments in foreign currency can be  issued without seeking the prior approval of the Reserve Bank  of India, subject to compliance with the under mentioned requirements:
Upper Tier II Instruments issued in foreign currency  should comply with all terms and conditions (except  the ‘step-up option’) applicable as detailed in the guidelines issued on  January 25, 2006, unless specifically modified.
The total amount of Upper Tier II Instruments issued in  foreign currency shall not exceed 25 per cent  of the unimpaired Tier I Capital. This eligible amount will be computed with reference to the amount of Tier I Capital  as on March 31 of the previous financial year,  after deduction of goodwill and other intangible assets but  before the deduction of investments.
This  will be in addition to the existing limit for foreign currency borrowings by Authorised Dealers in terms of Master Circular on  Risk Management and Inter-Bank Dealings.
Investment by FIIs in Upper Tier II Instruments raised  in Indian Rupees shall be outside the limit  for investment in corporate debt instruments. However, investment by FIIs in these instruments will be subject  to a separate ceiling of USD 500 million.
ii. Amount: The amount of Upper Tier II Instruments to be raised may  be decided by the Board of Directors of banks.
iii. Limit: Upper Tier II Instruments along with other components of  Tier II capital shall not exceed 100% of Tier I capital. The above  limit will be based on the amount of Tier I capital  after deduction of goodwill and other intangible assets but before the deduction  of investments.
iv. Maturity Period: The  Upper Tier II instruments should have a minimum maturity of 15 years.
v. Rate  of interest: The interest payable to  the investors may be either at a fixed rate or at a floating rate  referenced to a market determined rupee interest benchmark rate.
vi. Options: Upper  Tier II instruments shall not be issued with a ‘put option’ or a ‘step-up  option’. However banks may issue the  instruments with a ‘call option’ subject to strict compliance with each of  the following conditions:
Call  options may be exercised only if the instrument has run for at least ten years;
Call options shall be exercised only with the prior  approval of RBI (Department of Banking  Operations & Development). While considering the proposals  received from banks for exercising the call option the RBI would, among other things,  take into consideration the bank’s CRAR position both at the time of exercise  of the call option and after exercise of the call option.
vii) Lock-In Clause
a. Upper Tier II instruments shall be subjected  to a lock-in clause in terms of which the  issuing bank shall not be liable to pay either interest or principal, even at maturity,  if
the bank’s CRAR is  below the minimum regulatory requirement prescribed by RBI, or
the  impact of such payment results in bank’s CRAR falling below or remaining  below the minimum regulatory requirement prescribed by RBI.
b. However, banks may pay interest with the  prior approval of RBI when the impact of  such payment may result in net loss or increase the net loss provided CRAR remains above the regulatory norm. For this purpose  'Net Loss' would mean either (a) the  accumulated loss at the end of the previous financial year; or (b) the  loss incurred during the current financial year.
c. The interest amount due  and remaining unpaid may be allowed to be paid in the later years in cash/ cheque subject to the bank complying  with the above regulatory requirement.  While paying such unpaid interest and principal, banks are  allowed to pay compound interest at a rate not exceeding the coupon rate of the  relative Upper Tier II bonds, on the outstanding principal and interest.
d. All instances of  invocation of the lock-in clause should be notified by the issuing banks to the Chief General Managers-in-Charge of  Department of Banking Operations & Development and Department of Banking  Supervision of the Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai.
viii) Seniority of claim: The  claims of the investors in Upper Tier II instruments shall be
Superior to the claims of  investors in instruments eligible for inclusion in Tier  I capital; and
Subordinate to the claims  of all other creditors.
ix) Discount: The Upper Tier II instruments shall be subjected to a  progressive discount for capital adequacy purposes as in the  case of long-term subordinated debt over the last five years of their tenor. As they approach maturity these instruments should  be subjected to progressive discount  as indicated in the table below for being eligible for inclusion in Tier II capital.
Remaining Maturity of Instruments
Rate of Discount (%)
Less than one year
100
One year and more but less than two years
80
Two years and more but less than three years
60
Three years and more but less than four years
40
Four years and more but less than five years
20
x) Redemption: Upper Tier II instruments shall not be redeemable at the  initiative of the holder. All redemptions  shall be made only with the prior approval of the Reserve  Bank of India (Department of Banking Operations & Development).
xi) Other conditions
Upper Tier II instruments shall be fully paid-up,  unsecured, and free of any restrictive clauses.
Investment in Upper Tier II instruments by FIIs shall be  within the limits as laid down in the ECB Policy for investment in  debt instruments. In addition, NRIs shall also be eligible to invest in these  instruments as per existing policy.
Banks should comply with the terms and conditions, if  any, stipulated by SEBI/other regulatory authorities in regard  to issue of the instruments.
2. Compliance with Reserve requirements
The funds collected by various branches of the bank or  other banks for the issue and held
pending
finalisation of allotment of the  Upper Tier II Capital instruments will have to be taken into account for the  purpose of calculating reserve requirements.
The total amount raised by a bank through Upper Tier II  instruments shall be reckoned as liability for the calculation of  net demand and time liabilities for the  purpose of reserve requirements and, as such, will attract CRR/SLR requirements.
3. Reporting requirements
Banks issuing Upper Tier II instruments shall submit a  report to the Chief General  Manager-in-charge, Department of Banking Operations & Development, Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai giving details  of the debt raised, including the terms of issue specified at item 1  above together with a copy of the offer document soon after the issue is  completed.
4. Investment in Upper Tier II Instruments  issued by other banks/ FIs
A bank's investment in  Upper Tier II instruments issued by other banks and  financial institutions will be reckoned along with the investment in other instruments eligible for capital status while  computing compliance with the overall ceiling of 10 percent for  cross holding of capital among banks/FIs  prescribed vide circular DBOD.BP.BC.No.3/ 21.01.002/ 2004- 05 dated July  6, 2004 and also subject to cross holding limits.
Bank's investments in Upper Tier II  instruments issued by other banks/ financial  institutions will attract a 100 per cent risk weight for capital adequacy purposes.
5. Grant  of advances against Upper Tier II Instruments
Banks shall not grant advances against the security of  the Upper Tier II instruments issued by them.
6. Classification in the Balance Sheet
Banks may indicate the amount raised by issue of  Upper Tier II instruments by way of explanatory notes / remarks in the Balance  Sheet as well as under the head” Hybrid debt  capital instruments issued as bonds/debentures” under Schedule 4 - '  Borrowings’.
ANNEX - 4
Terms and conditions applicable to Perpetual Cumulative  Preference Shares
(PCPS) / Redeemable Non-Cumulative Preference Shares  (RNCPS) /
Redeemable Cumulative Preference  Shares (RCPS) as part of Upper Tier II Capital
1. Terms of Issue
1.1 Characteristics of the instruments
(a) These instruments could be either perpetual (PCPS) or  dated (RNCPS and RCPS) instruments with a fixed maturity of minimum  15 years.
(b) The  perpetual instruments shall be cumulative. The dated instruments could be  cumulative or non-cumulative
1.2 Limits
The outstanding amount of these instruments along with  other components of Tier II capital shall not  exceed 100 per cent of Tier I capital at any point of time. The above limit  will be based on the amount of Tier I capital after deduction of  goodwill and other intangible assets but before the deduction of  investments.
1.3 Amount
The amount to be raised may be decided by the Board of  Directors of banks.
1.4 Options
(i) These instruments shall not be issued with a 'put option'  or ‘step-up option’.
(ii) However,  banks may issue the instruments with a call option at a particular date subject  to strict compliance with each of the following conditions:
The  call option on the instrument is permissible after the instrument has run for  at least ten years; and
Call  option shall be exercised only with the prior approval of RBI (Department of Banking Operations & Development). While  considering the proposals received from banks for exercising the call option the RBI would, among other things,  take into consideration the bank's  CRAR position both at the time of exercise of the call option and after  exercise of the call option.
1.5 Coupon
The  coupon payable to the investors may be either at a fixed rate or at a floating  rate referenced to a market determined rupee interest benchmark rate.
1.6 Payment of coupon
1.6.1 The coupon payable on these instruments will be treated  as interest and accordingly debited to P& L Account.  However, it will be payable only if
The bank's CRAR is  above the minimum regulatory requirement prescribed by RBI.
The impact of such  payment does not result in bank's CRAR falling below or remaining  below the minimum regulatory requirement prescribed by RBI.
The bank does not have a  net loss. For this purpose the Net Loss is defined as either  (i) the accumulated loss at the end of the previous financial year / half year  as the case may be; or (ii) the loss incurred during the current financial  year.
In the case of PCPS and  RCPS the unpaid/partly unpaid coupon will be treated as a liability. The interest amount due and remaining unpaid  may be allowed to be paid in later years subject to the bank  complying with the above requirements.
In the case of RNCPS, deferred coupon will  not be paid in future years, even if adequate profit is available and the level  of CRAR conforms to the regulatory minimum. The  bank can however pay a coupon at a rate lesser than the prescribed rate, if adequate  profit is available and the level of CRAR conforms to the regulatory minimum.
1.6.2 All instances of non-payment of interest/payment of  interest at a lesser rate than prescribed rate  should be notified by the issuing banks to the Chief General Managers-in-Charge of Department of Banking Operations &  Development and Department of Banking Supervision, Central Office of  the Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai.
1.7 Redemption / repayment of  redeemable Preference Shares included in Upper Tier II
1.7.1 All these instruments shall not be redeemable at the  initiative of the holder.
1.7.2 Redemption of these instruments at maturity shall be  made only with the prior approval of the Reserve Bank of India  (Department of Banking Operations and Development, subject inter alia to the  following conditions :
the  bank's CRAR is above the minimum regulatory requirement prescribed by RBI
the impact of such payment does not result in bank's  CRAR falling below or remaining below the minimum regulatory  requirement prescribed by RBI
1.8 Seniority of claim
The  claims of the investors in these instruments shall be senior to the claims of  investors 
        in instruments eligible for inclusion in Tier  I capital and subordinate to the claims of all other creditors including those in Lower Tier II and the depositors.  Amongst the investors of various  instruments included in Upper Tier II, the claims shall rank pari-passu with each  other.
1.9 Amortization for the purpose of computing CRAR
The Redeemable Preference Shares (both cumulative and  non-cumulative) shall be subjected to a  progressive discount for capital adequacy purposes over the last five years  of their tenor, as they approach maturity as indicated in the table below for  being eligible for inclusion in Tier II capital.
Remaining Maturity of Instruments
Rate of Discount (%)
Less    than one year
100
One    year and more but less than two years
80
Two    years and more but less than three years
60
Three    years and more but less than four years
40
Four    years and more but less than five years
20
1.10 Other conditions
(a) These instruments should be fully paid-up, unsecured,  and free of any restrictive clauses.
(b) Investment by FIIs and NRIs shall be within an overall  limit of 49 per cent and 24 per cent of the issue respectively, subject  to the investment by each FII not exceeding 10 per cent of the issue and investment by each NRI not exceeding 5 per  cent of the issue. Investment by FIIs in these instruments shall be  outside the ECB limit for rupee denominated corporate debt as fixed by Government of India from time to time. However,  investment by FIIs in these instruments  will be subject to separate ceiling. The overall non­resident holding of  Preference Shares and equity shares in public sector banks will be subject to the  statutory / regulatory limit.
(c) Banks should comply with the terms and conditions, if  any, stipulated by SEBI / other regulatory authorities in regard  to issue of the instruments.
2. Compliance with Reserve requirements
(a) The funds collected by various branches of the bank  or other banks for the issue and held pending  finalization of allotment of these instruments will have to be taken  into account for the purpose of calculating reserve requirements.
(b) The total amount raised by a bank through the issue of  these instruments shall be reckoned as  liability for the calculation of net demand and time liabilities for the purpose of reserve requirements and, as such, will  attract CRR / SLR requirements.
3. Reporting requirements
Banks issuing these instruments shall submit a report to  the Chief General Manager-in-charge, Department of Banking  Operations & Development, Reserve Bank  of India, Mumbai giving details of the debt raised, including the terms of  issue specified at item 1 above  together with a copy of the offer document soon after the issue is  completed.
4. Investment in these instruments issued by other banks / FIs
A bank's investment in  these instruments issued by other banks and financial institutions will be reckoned along with the investment in  other instruments eligible for capital status while computing compliance with  the overall ceiling of 10 per cent of  investing banks' capital funds prescribed vide circular DBOD.BP.BC.No.3/ 21.01.002/  2004-05 dated 6th July 2004 and also subject to cross holding limits.
Bank's investments in  these instruments issued by other banks / financial institutions  will attract a 100 per cent risk weight for capital adequacy purposes.
5. Grant of  advances against these instruments
Banks should not grant advances against the security of  these instruments issued by them.
6. Classification  in the balance sheet
These instruments will be classified as borrowings  under Schedule 4- Borrowings of the Balance sheet as  item No.1.
ANNEX - 5
Issue of unsecured bonds as subordinated debt by banks for  raising Tier-II capital
1.
Terms of issue of bond
To be eligible for inclusion in Tier – II Capital, terms  of issue of the bonds as subordinated debt instruments should be  in conformity with the following:
(a)
Amount
The  amount of subordinated debt to be raised may be decided by the Board of  Directors of the bank.
(b)
Maturity  period
(i) Subordinated debt instruments with an initial  maturity period of less than 5 years, or  with a remaining maturity of one year should not be  included as part of Tier-II Capital. They should  be subjected to progressive discount as they approach maturity at the rates shown  below:
Remaining maturity of the    instruments
Rate of discount
a) Less than One year
100%
b) More than One year and less than Two years
80%
c) More than Two years and less than Three years
60%
d) More than three years and less than Four Years
40%
e) More than Four years and less than Five years
20%
(ii) The bonds should have a minimum maturity of 5 years.  However if the bonds are issued in the last quarter of the year i.e.  from 1st January to 31st March, they should have a  minimum tenure of sixty three months.
(c) Rate of interest
The  coupon rate would be decided by the Board of Directors of banks.
(d)
Options
Subordinated debt instruments shall not be issued with a  'put option' or ‘step-up option’. However banks may  issue the instruments with a call option subject to strict compliance with each  of the following conditions:
Call option may be exercised after the instrument has  run for at least
five years
; and
Call  option shall be exercised only with the prior approval of RBI (Department of Banking Operations & Development). While  considering the proposals received from banks for exercising the call  option the RBI would, among other things, take into consideration the bank's CRAR position both at the time of exercise of  the call option and after exercise  of the call option.
(e)
Other conditions
The instruments should be fully paid-up, unsecured,  subordinated to the claims of other creditors,  free of restrictive clauses and should not be redeemable at the initiative of  the holder or without the consent of the Reserve Bank of India.
Necessary permission from Foreign Exchange Department  should be obtained for issuing the instruments to NRIs/ FIIs.
Banks should comply with the terms and conditions, if  any, set by SEBI/other regulatory authorities in regard to issue of  the instruments.
2. Inclusion in Tier II capital
Subordinated debt instruments will be limited to 50 per  cent of Tier-I Capital of the bank. These instruments, together  with other components of Tier II capital, should not exceed 100% of Tier I capital.
3. Grant  of advances against bonds
Banks  should not grant advances against the security of their own bonds.
4. Compliance  with Reserve requirements
The total amount of Subordinated Debt raised by the bank  has to be reckoned as liability for the  calculation of net demand and time liabilities for the purpose of reserve requirements  and, as such, will attract CRR/SLR requirements.
5. Treatment  of Investment in subordinated debt
Investments by banks in subordinated debt of other banks  will be assigned 100% risk weight for capital  adequacy purpose. Also, the bank's aggregate investment in Tier II bonds issued by other banks and financial institutions  shall be within the overall ceiling of 10  percent of the investing bank's total capital. The capital for this purpose will  be the same as that reckoned for the purpose of capital adequacy.
6. Subordinated  Debt in foreign currency raised by Indian banks:
Banks may take approval of RBI on a  case-by-case basis.
7. Subordinated debt to retail investors
:  Banks issuing subordinated debt to retail investors are advised to  adhere to the following conditions:
a) The requirement for specific sign-off as quoted below,  from the investors for having understood the features and risks of the  instrument may be incorporated in the common application form of  the proposed debt issue.
"By making  this application, I/We acknowledge that I/We have understood the terms and conditions of the Issue of  [ insert the name of the instruments being issued J of [ Name of The Bank J as  disclosed in the Draft Shelf Prospectus, Shelf Prospectus and Tranche Document".
For floating rate instruments, banks should not use its  Fixed Deposit rate as benchmark.
All the publicity material, application form and other  communication with the investor should  clearly state in bold letters (with font size 14) how a subordinated bond is different  from fixed deposit particularly that it is not covered by deposit insurance.
8. Reporting  requirements
The banks should submit a report to  Reserve Bank of India giving details of the capital raised, such as, amount raised,  maturity of the instrument, rate of interest together with a copy of the offer document soon  after the issue is completed.
9. Classification  in the Balance Sheet:
These instruments should be classified under 'Schedule 4 – Borrowings’ of  the Balance sheet.
ANNEX 6
CAPITAL CHARGE FOR SPECIFIC RISK
Sr.
No.
Nature of investment
Maturity
Specific risk
capital charge
(as % of
exposure)
Claims    on Government
1.
Investments    in Government Securities.
All
0.0
2.
Investments    in other approved securities guaranteed    by Central/State Government.
All
0.0
3.
Investments    in other securities where payment of interest and repayment of principal are    guaranteed by Central Govt. (This will include investments in    Indira/ Kisan Vikas Patra (IVP/KVP) and investments    in Bonds and Debentures where payment of interest    and principal is guaranteed by Central Govt.)
All
0.0
4.
Investments    in other securities where payment of interest and repayment of principal are    guaranteed by    State Governments.
All
0.0
5.
Investments    in other approved securities where payment of interest    and repayment of principal are not guaranteed by Central/State Govt.
All
1.80
6.
Investments in    Government guaranteed securities of    Government Undertakings which do not form part of the approved market borrowing programme.
All
1.80
7.
Investment    in state government guaranteed securities    included under items 2, 4 and 6 above where the investment is non-performing.    However the banks need to maintain    capital at 9.0% only on those State    Government guaranteed securities issued    by the defaulting entities and not on all the securities issued or guaranteed by that State Government.
All
9.00
8.
Claims on banks, including investments in    securities which are guaranteed by banks as    to payment of interest and repayment of principal
For    residual term to final maturity 6 months    or less
0.30
For     residual term to final maturity between 6 and 24 months
1.125
For    residual term to final maturity exceeding 24    months
1.80
9.
Investments    in subordinated debt instruments and bonds issued by other    banks for their Tier II capital.
All
9.00
Claims    on Others
10.
Investment    in Mortgage Backed Securities (MBS) of residential assets    of Housing Finance Companies    (HFCs) which are recognised and supervised    by National Housing Bank (subject to satisfying terms & conditions    given in Annex 10.2
All
4.50
11.
Investment    in Mortgage Backed Securities (MBS) which are backed by    housing loan qualifying for 50% risk weight.
All
4.50
12.
Investment    in securitised paper pertaining to an infrastructure facility
All
4.50
13.
All other    investments including investment in securities    issued by SPVs set up for securitisation transactions.
All
9.00
14.
Direct investments in equity shares, convertible bonds, debentures and units of equity oriented mutual    funds including those exempted from Capital Market Exposure norms.
All
11.25
15.
Investment    in Mortgage Backed Securities and other securitised exposures to Commercial    Real Estate
All
13.5
16.
Investments in    Venture Capital Funds
All
13.5
17.
Investments    in instruments issued by NBFC-ND-SI
All
9.00
18.
Investments in Security Receipts issued by Securitisation Company/ Asset reconstruction
Company and held under AFS portfolio
All
13.5
The category ‘claim on Government’ will include all forms  of Government securities including dated  Government securities, Treasury bills and other short-term investments and  instruments where repayment of both principal and interest are fully guaranteed  by the Government. The category  'Claims on others' will include issuers of securities other than  Government and banks.
ANNEX 7
DURATION  METHOD
(Time bands and assumed changes in  yield)
Time    Bands
Assumed    Change in 
          Yield
Zone    1
1 month or less
1.00
1 to 3 months
1.00
3 to 6 months
1.00
6 to 12 months
1.00
Zone    2
1.0 to 1.9 years
0.90
1.9 to 2.8 years
0.80
2.8 to 3.6 years
0.75
Zone    3
3.6 to 4.3 years
0.75
4.3 to 5.7 years
0.70
5.7 to 7.3 years
0.65
7.3 to 9.3 years
0.60
9.3 to 10.6 years
0.60
10.6 to 12 years
0.60
12 to 20 years
0.60
over 20 years
0.60
ANNEX 8
Horizontal  Disallowances
Zones
Time    band
Within the
zones
Between
adjacent zones
Between zones
1 and 3
Zone    1
1 month or less
40%
40%
40%
100%
1 to 3 months
3 to 6 months
6 to 12 months
Zone    2
1.0 to 1.9 years
30%
1.9 to 2.8 years
2.8 to 3.6 years
Zone    3
3.6 to 4.3 years
30%
4.3 to 5.7 years
5.7 to 7.3 years
7.3 to 9.3 years
9.3 to 10.6 years
10.6 to 12 years
12 to 20 years
over 20 years
Note: Capital charges should be calculated for each  currency separately and then summed with no offsetting between positions of opposite sign. In the case  of those currencies in  which business is insignificant (where the turnover in the respective currency is less than 5 per cent of  overall foreign exchange turnover), separate  calculations for each currency are not required. The bank may, instead, slot within each appropriate time-band, the net  long or short position for each currency. However, these individual net  positions are to be summed within each time-band, irrespective of whether they  are long or short positions, to produce a gross  position figure. In the case of residual currencies the gross positions in each  time-band will be subject to the assumed change in yield set out in table with  no further offsets.
ANNEX-11
List of instructions and circulars consolidated
Part  – A
List of Circulars
No.
Circular No.
Date
Subject
1
DBOD.No.BP.BC.57/21.01.002/ 2005-2006
January    25, 2006
Enhancement of banks’ capital raising options    for capital adequacy purposes
2
DBOD.NO.BP.BC.23/21.01.002/2002- 03
August    29, 2002
Capital    Adequacy    and Provisioning Requirements for Export Credit Covered by    Insurance/Guarantee.
3
DBOD.    No. IBS. BC.65/ 23. 10.015 / 2001-02
February    14, 2002
Subordinated debt    for inclusion in Tier II capital – Head Office borrowings in foreign currency by Foreign Banks operating in India
4
DBOD.No.BP.BC.106/21.01.002/2001-    02
May    24, 2002
Risk Weight on    Housing Finance and Mortgage Backed    Securities
5
DBOD.No.BP.BC.128/21.04.048/00- 01
June    07, 2001
SSI    Advances Guaranteed by Credit Guarantee Fund Trust    for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE)
6
DBOD.BP.BC.110/21.01.002/00-01
April    20, 2001
Risk    Weight on Deposits placed with SIDBI/NABARD in lieu of shortfall in lending    to Priority Sectors
7
DBOD.BP.BC.83/21.01.002/00-01
February    28, 2001
Loans and advances    to staff – assignment of risk weight and treatment in the balance sheet.
8
DBOD.No.BP.BC.87/21.01.002/99
September    08, 1999
Capital    Adequacy Ratio - Risk Weight on Bank’s Investments in Bonds/ Securities Issued    by Financial Institutions
9
DBOD.No.BP.BC.5/21.01.002/98-99
February    08, 1999
Issue    of    Subordinated Debt for Raising Tier II Capital
10
DBOD.No.BP.BC.1 19/21.01.002/ 98
December    28, 1998
Monetary    & Credit Policy Measures-    Capital Adequacy Ratio Risk    Weight on Banks' Investments in Bonds/Securities    Issued by Financial Institutions
11
DBOD.No.BP.BC.152/ 21.01.002/ 96
November    27, 1996
Capital    Adequacy    Measures
12
DBOD.No.IBS.BC.64/ 23.61.001/ 96
May    24, 1996
Capital    Adequacy    Measures
13
DBOD.No.BP.BC.13/ 21.01.002/96
February    08, 1996
Capital    Adequacy    Measures
14
DBOD.No.BP.BC.99/ 21.01.002/94
August    24, 1994
Capital    Adequacy    Measures
15
DBOD.No.BP.BC.9/ 21.01.002/94
February    08, 1994
Capital    Adequacy    Measures
16
DBOD.No.IBS.BC.98/ 23-50-001-92/93
April    06, 1993
Capital    Adequacy    Measures - Treatment of Foreign Currency Loans to Indian Parties    (DFF)
17
DBOD.No.BP.BC.117/ 21.01.002/92
April    22, 1992
Capital    Adequacy    Measures
18
DBOD.No.BP.BC.23/    21.01.002/2006-2007
July    21, 2006
Enhancement of banks’ capital    raising options for capital adequacy purposes
Part  – B
List of other circulars containing instructions/ guidelines  /directives related to Prudential Norms
No.
Circular No.
Date
Subject
1
DBOD.BP.BC.105/21.01.002/2002-2003,
May 07, 2003
Monetary    And Credit Policy 2003-04 - Investment Fluctuation Reserve
2
DBOD.No.BP.BC.96/21.04.048/2002-03
April 23, 2003
Guidelines    on Sale Of Financial    Assets to Securitisation Company    (SC)/ Reconstruction Company (RC) (Created    Under The Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets And    Enforcement of Security Interest    Act, 2002) and Related Issues.
3
DBOD    No. BP.BC.89/21.04.018/ 2002- 03
March 29, 2003
Guidelines on compliance with Accounting Standards(AS) by banks
4
DBOD.No.BP.BC.72/21.04.018/2002-    03
February 25, 2003
Guidelines    for Consolidated    Accounting And Other Quantitative Methods to Facilitate Consolidated Supervision.
5
DBOD.NO.BP.BC.71/21.04.103/    2002- 03
February 19, 2003
Risk    Management system in Banks Guidelines in Country Risk Managements
6
DBOD.No.BP.BC.67/21.04.048/ 2002-03 2003
February 04, 2003
Guidelines    on Infrastructure Financing.
7
DBOD.Dir.BC.62/13.07.09/    2002-03
January 24, 2003
Discounting/Rediscounting    of    Bills by Banks.
8
A.P.(DIR Series)    Circular No. 63
December 21, 2002
Risk Management and    Inter Bank Dealings
9
No.EC.CO.FMD.6/02.03.75/2002-2003
November 20, 2002
Hedging of Tier I    Capital
10
DBOD.No.BP.BC.57/21.04.048/ 2001-02
January 10, 2002
Valuation    of investments by banks
11
DBOD.No.BC.34/12.01.001/    2001-02
October 22, 2001
Section 42(1) Of  The Reserve Bank Of    India Act, 1934 -Maintenance of    Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR).
12
DBOD.BP.BC.    73/21.04.018/2000-01
January 30, 2001
Voluntary    Retirement    Scheme (VRS) Expenditure – Accounting and Prudential Regulatory    Treatment.
13
DBOD.No.BP.BC.31/21.04.048/    2000
October 10, 2000
Monetary & Credit Policy Measures – Mid term    review for the year 2000-01
14
DBOD.No.BP.BC.169/21.01.002/    2000
May 03, 2000
Monetary & Credit Policy Measures
15
DBOD.No.BP.BC.    144/21.04.048/ 2000
February 29, 2000
Income Recognition, Asset Classification and Provisioning and Other Related Matters and Adequacy Standards - Takeout Finance
16
DBOD.No.BP.BC.121/21.04.124/    99
November 03, 1999
Monetary & Credit Policy    Measures
17
DBOD.No.BP.BC.    101/21.04.048/ 99
October 18, 1999
Income Recognition, AssetClassification and Provisioning – Valuation of Investments by Banks in Subsidiaries.
18
DBOD.No.BP.BC.82/    21.01.002/99
August 18, 1999
Monetary & Credit Policy     Measures
19
FSC.BC.70/24.01.001/99
July 17, 1999
Equipment    Leasing Activity - Accounting    / Provisioning Norms
20
MPD.BC.187/07.01.279/1999-2000
July 07, 1999
Forward Rate    Agreements / Interest Rate Swaps
21
DBOD.No.BP.BC.24/    21.04.048/99
March 30, 1999
Prudential Norms    – Capital Adequacy- Income Recognition, Asset Classification    and Provisioning
22
DBOD.No.BP.BC.35/    21.01.002/ 99
April 24, 1999
Monetary & Credit    Policy Measures
23
DBOD.No.BP.BC.103/21.01.002/    99
October 31, 1998
Monetary & Credit    Policy Measures
24
DBOD.No.BP.BC.32/ 21.04.018/ 98
April 29, 1998
Monetary    and Credit Policy Measures
25
DBOD.No.BP.BC.9/21.04.018/    98
January 27, 1998
Balance Sheet of Bank -Disclosures
26
DBOD.No.BP.BC.9/21.04.048/    97
January 29, 1997
Prudential Norms - Capital    Adequacy,    Income Recognition, Asset Classification and Provisioning
27
DBOD.BP.BC.No.3/21.01.002/    2004- 05
July 06, 2004
Prudential    norms on Capital Adequacy –Cross holding of capital among banks/    financial institutions
28
DBOD.No.BP.BC.103/21.04.151/2003-04
June 24, 2004
Guidelines on Capital 
          Charge for Market risks
29
DBOD.No.BP.BC.92/21.04.048/ 2003-04
June 16, 2004
Annual Policy Statement for the year 2004-05 - Guidelines on infrastructure financing
30
DBOD.No.BP.BC.91/21.01.002/    2003-04
June 15, 2004
Annual Policy Statement for the year 2004-05 – Risk Weight for Exposure to Public Financial    Institutions (PFIs)
31
F.No.11/7/2003-BOA
May    06, 2004
Permission to nationalized banks to issue subordinated debt    for augmenting Tier II capital
32
DBS.FID.No.C15/01.02.00/    2003-04
June    15, 2004
Risk Weight for    Exposures to PFIs
33
DBOD.BP.BC.29/21.01.048/    2004-05
August    13, 2004
Prudential Norms-State Govt. guaranteed exposures
34
DBOD.BP.BC.61/21.01.002/    2004-05
December 23, 2004
Mid-Term Review    of the Annual Policy Statement for the    year 2004-05 - Risk weight on    housing loans and consumer credit
35
DBOD.No.BP.BC.85/21.04.141/    2004-05
April    30, 2005
Capital Adequacy- IFR
36
DBOD.No.BP.BC.16/21.04.048/    2005-06
July    13, 2005
Guidelines on purchase    of    Non-Performing Assets
37
DBOD.No.BP.BC.21/21.01.002/    2005-06
July 26, 2005
Risk Weight on Capital Market Exposure
38
DBOD.No.BP.BC.38/21.04.141/    2005-06
October    10, 2005
Capital Adequacy-IFR
39
DBOD.No.BP.BC.60/21.04.048/2005-06
February 1, 2006
Guidelines on Securitisation of Standard Assets
40
DBOD.No.BP.BC.73/21.04.048/    2005-06
March 24, 2006
Bills Discounted    under LC-Risk Weight and Exposure Norms
41
DBOD.No.BP.BC.84/21.01.002/    2005-06
May    25, 2006
APS for 2006-07-Risk Weight on Exposures to Commercial Real    estate and Venture Capital Funds
42
DBOD.BP.BC.87/21.01.002/    2005-06
June    8, 2006
Innovative Tier I/Tier II    Bonds - Hedging by banks through Derivative Structures
43
DBOD.NO.BP.    BC. 89 / 21.04.048/2005-06
June    22, 2006
Prudential norms on    creation and    utilisation of floating provisions
44
DBOD.NO.BP.    BC. 53 / 21.04.048/2006-07
January 31, 2007
Third Quarter Review    of the Annual Policy Statement on Monetary Policy for    the year 2006-07-Provisioning    Requirement for Standard Assets and Risk Weights for Capital Adequacy
45
IDMD.NO.    /11.01.01(B)/2006-07
January 31, 2007
Secondary Market Transactions    in Govt. Securities - Short-selling
46
DBOD.NO.BP.    BC. 92/ 21.01.002/2006-07
May 3, 2007
Annual Policy Statement    for the year 2006-07:    Risk Weight on residential housing loans
47
DBOD.No.BP.BC.42/21.01.002/2007-2008
October 29, 2007
Guidelines for Issuing Preference Shares as part of Regulatory    Capital
48
DBOD.BP.BC.No.59/21.06.001/    2007-08
January 17, 2008
Prudential Norms for    Capital Adequacy - Risk Weight for Educational Loans
49
DBOD.No.BP.BC.83/21.06.001/    2007-08
May 14, 2008
Claims Secured by Residential Property - Change in limits    for risk weights
50
DBOD.No.BP.BC.88/21.06.001/    2007-08
May 30, 2008
Capital Adequacy Norms – Treatment of Banks' Investments in Subsidiaries / Associates and of the Subsidiaries'/Associates' Investments in    Parent Banks
51
DBOD.No.BP.BC.26/21.04.048/    2008-09
July 30, 2008
Agricultural Debt    Waiver and   debt Relief Scheme, 2008- Prudential Norms on Income Recognition, Asset Classification, Provisioning and capital Adequacy.
52
DBOD.No.BP.BC.31/21.04.157/    2008-09
August 8, 2008
Prudential Norms    for Off- balance Sheet Exposures of Banks
53
DBOD.No.BP.BC.76/21.04.0132/2008-09
November    3, 2008
Prudential    Guidelines on Restructuring    of Advances by Banks
54
DBOD.BP.BC.83/21.01.002/    2008-09
November    15, 2008
Review    of Prudential Norms- Provisioning for Standard    Assets and Risk Weights for Exposures    to Corporates, Commercial real Estate and NBFC-ND-SI
55
DBOD.No.BP.BC.118/21.04.048/    2008-09
March    25, 2009
Prudential    treatment of different types of Provisions in    respect of loan portfolios
56
DBOD.No.BP.BC.120/21.01.002/2008-2009
April 2, 2009
Guidelines for    Issuing Preference Shares as part of Regulatory    Capital
57
Mail Box Clarification
May 12, 2009
Claims    on    Banks- Exposures of the Indian Branches of    Foreign Bank Guaranteed/ Counter- guaranteed by Head Offices/ Overseas Branches
58
DBOD.BP.BC.No.134/21.06.001/2008-09
May 26, 2009
Capital    Adequacy Norms for Banks' Exposures to Central Counterparties    (CCPs)
59
DBOD.BP.BC.No.38/21.01.002/    2008-09
September 7, 2009
Issue    of Subordinated Debt for    raising Tier II Capital
60
DBOD.BP.BC.No.69/21.01.002/    2009-10
January 13, 2010
Retail    issue of Subordinated Debt for raising Tier II Capital
61
Mail Box Clarification
January    18, 2010
Capital    Adequacy    Framework For Security Receipts
62
Mail    Box Clarification
January    25, 2010
Guaranteeing    returns of investors    of capital instruments of Banks
63
Mail    Box Clarification
January    28, 2010
Inclusion    of Quarterly    Un‑Audited Profits for computation of Capital Adequacy
64
DBOD.BP.BC.No.87/21.06.001/2009-    10
January    7, 2010
Prudential    guidelines on    NCAF- Parallel run & Prudential Floor
65
DBOD.No.BP.BC.69/08.12.001/2010-11
December    23, 2010
Housing    Loans by Commercial Banks- LTV Ratio, risk weight & provisioning
66
DBOD.BP.BC.No.71/21.06.001/2010-    11
December    31,2010
Prudential    guidelines on    NCAF- Parallel run & Prudential Floor
67
DBOD.BP.BC.No.75/21.06.001/2010-    11
January    20, 2011
Regulatory    Capital Instruments – Step up Option
68
DBOD.BP.BC.No.80/21.04.018/2010-    11
February    9, 2011
Reopening    of Pension Option to Employees of Public Sector Banks and Enhancement in    Gratuity Limits–Prudential Regulatory Treatment
69
DBOD.No.BP.BC.69/21.06.001/    2011-12
December 27, 2011
Capital Requirement for Banks’ Investments in Financial Entities    exempted from Capital Market Exposure
70
DBOD    Mail Box Clarification
April 17, 2012
Deletion of the    term Overseas Corporate Bodies (OCBs)
71
DBOD.BP.BC.No.61/21.06.203/    2011-12
November 30, 2011
Prudential Guidelines    on Credit Default Swaps (CDS)
72
DBOD.No.BP.BC.103/21.04.177/    2011-12
May 07, 2012
Revisions to the    Guidelines on Securitisation Transactions
73
DBOD.No.BP.BC.90/21.04.048/2012-13
April 16, 2013
Advances guaranteed    by Credit Risk Guarantee Fund Trust for Low Income Housing (CRGFTLIH) – Risk    Weights and Provisioning
74
DBOD.BP.BC.No.    95/21.06.001/2012-13
May 27, 2013
Prudential    Guidelines on Capital Adequacy and Market Discipline – New Capital Adequacy    Framework – Parallel run and prudential floor
75
DBOD.BP.BC.No.    104/08.12.015/2012-13
June 21, 2013
Housing Sector –    New Sub-Sector CRE (Residential Housing) within CRE & Rationalisation of    Provisioning, Risk-weight and LTV Ratios
3. GLOSSARY
Asset
An asset is anything of value that is owned by a    person or business
Available for Sale
The securities available for sale are those securities where the intention of the bank is neither to trade nor to hold till maturity. These securities    are valued at the fair value which is determined    by reference to the best available source    of current market quotations or other data relative to current    value.
Balance Sheet
A balance sheet is a financial statement of the assets and liabilities of a trading concern, recorded at a particular point in time.
Banking Book
The banking book comprises assets and liabilities, which are contracted basically on    account of relationship or for steady income and statutory obligations and are generally held till maturity.
Basel Capital Accord
The Basel Capital Accord is an Agreement concluded among country representatives in 1988 to develop    standardised risk-based capital requirements for banks across countries. The Accord was replaced with a new capital adequacy framework (Basel II), published    in June 2004. Basel II is based on three    mutually reinforcing pillars that    allow banks and supervisors to evaluate    properly the various risks that banks face. These three pillars are: minimum    capital requirements, which seek to refine the present measurement; supervisory    review of an institution's capital adequacy    and internal assessment process; and market    discipline through effective    disclosure to encourage safe and sound banking    practices
Basel    Committee on Banking Supervision
The Basel Committee is a committee of bank supervisors consisting of members from each of the G10 countries. The Committee is a forum for discussion on the handling of specific supervisory problems. It coordinates the sharing of supervisory responsibilities among national authorities in respect of banks' foreign establishments with the aim of ensuring effective    supervision of banks' activities    worldwide.
Basic    Indicator Approach
An operational risk measurement technique permitted    under Basel II. The approach sets a charge for operational risk as a    fixed percentage ("alphafactor") of a single indicator. The indicator serves as a proxy for the    bank's risk exposure.
Basis    Risk
The risk that the interest rate   of    different assets, liabilities and    off-balance sheet items may change    in different magnitude is termed as basis risk.
Capital
Capital refers to the funds (e.g., money, loans, equity) which are available to carry on a business, make an investment, and generate future revenue. Capital also refers to physical assets which can be used to generate future returns.
Capital adequacy
A measure of the adequacy    of an entity's capital resources in    relation to its current liabilities    and also in relation to the risks associated    with its assets. An appropriate level of capital adequacy ensures that the entity has sufficient capital to    support its activities and that its net    worth is sufficient to absorb adverse    changes in the value of its assets without    becoming insolvent. For example, under    BIS (Bank for International Settlements)    rules, banks are required to maintain    a certain level of capital against their risk-adjusted assets.
Capital reserves
That portion of a company's profits not paid out as dividends to shareholders. They are also    known as undistributable reserves.
Convertible Bond
A bond giving    the investor the option to convert the bond into equity at a fixed conversion price or as per a pre-determined pricing    formula.
Core    Capital
Tier    1 capital is generally referred to as Core Capital
Credit    risk
Risk that a party to a contractual agreement or transaction will    be unable to meet their obligations or will default    on commitments. Credit risk can be    associated with almost any transaction    or instrument such as swaps, repos,    CDs, foreign exchange transactions, etc.    Specific types of credit risk include sovereign risk, country risk, legal or force    majeure risk, marginal risk and settlement    risk.
Debentures
Bonds issued by a company bearing a fixed rate of interest usually payable half yearly on specific    dates and principal amount repayable on a particular date on redemption of    the debentures.
Deferred    Tax Assets
Unabsorbed depreciation    and carry forward of losses which can be set-off against future taxable    income which is considered as timing differences result in deferred tax assets. The    deferred Tax Assets are accounted as per the Accounting Standard 22. Deferred Tax Assets have an effect of decreasing future income tax payments, which indicates that they are prepaid income taxes and    meet definition of assets. Whereas deferred tax liabilities have an effect of increasing future year's income tax payments, which indicates that they are accrued income taxes    and meet definition of liabilities.
Derivative
A derivative    instrument derives much of its value from an    underlying product. Examples of derivatives include    futures, options, forwards and swaps. For example, a forward    contract can    be derived from the spot currency market and    the spot markets for borrowing and lending.    In the past, derivative instruments tended to be restricted only to those products which could be derived from spot    markets. However, today the term    seems to be used for any product    that can be derived from any other.
Duration
Duration (Macaulay    duration) measures the price    volatility of fixed income securities. It is often used in the comparison of the interest rate risk between securities with different coupons and different maturities. It is the weighted average of the present value of all the cash flows associated with a fixed income security.    It is expressed in years. The duration of a    fixed income security is always shorter than its term to maturity, except in the case of zero coupon securities where they are the same.
Foreign Institutional Investor
An institution established or  incorporated outside India which proposes to make investment in India in securities; provided that a domestic asset management company or domestic portfolio manager who manages funds raised or collected or brought from outside India for investment in India on behalf of a sub-account, shall be deemed to be a Foreign Institutional Investor.
Forward Contract
A forward contract is    an agreement between two parties to buy or sell an agreed amount of a    commodity or financial instrument at an agreed price, for delivery    on an agreed future date. In contrast to a futures contract, a forward contract is    not transferable or exchange    tradable, its terms are not standardized    and no margin is exchanged. The    buyer of the forward contract is said to be long the contract and the seller is said to be short the    contract.
General provisions and loss reserves
Such reserves, if they are not attributable to the actual diminution in value or identifiable potential loss in any specific asset and are available    to meet unexpected losses, can be included in Tier II capital
General risk
Risk    that relates to overall market conditions while    specific risk is risk that relates to the issuer of a particular    security
Hedging
Taking action to eliminate or reduce exposure to    risk
Held for Trading
Securities where the intention is to trade by taking    advantage of short-term price / interest rate movements.
Horizontal    Disallowance
A disallowance of    offsets to required capital 
            used the BIS Method for assessing market risk 
          for    regulatory capital. In order to calculate the capital required for interest rate risk of a trading    portfolio, the BIS Method allows offsets of    long and short positions. Yet interest rate risks of instruments at different horizontal points of the yield curve are not perfectly correlated.    Hence, the BIS Method requires that a portion of these offsets be    disallowed.
Hybrid debt capital instruments
In    this category, fall a number of capital instruments, which    combine certain characteristics of equity and certain characteristics of debt. Each has a particular feature, which    can be considered to affect its quality as    capital. Where these instruments have    close similarities to equity, in particular when they are able to support losses on an ongoing basis without    triggering liquidation, they may be included in Tier II capital.
Interest    rate risk
Risk that the financial    value of assets or    liabilities (or inflows/outflows)    will be    altered because of fluctuations in    interest rates. For example, the risk that future investment may have    to be made at lower rates and future borrowings at higher rates.
Long Position
A long position refers to a position where gains arise from a rise in the value of the underlying.
Market    risk
Risk of loss arising from movements in market prices or rates away from the rates or prices set    out in a transaction or agreement.
Modified    Duration
The modified duration or volatility of an interest    bearing security is its Macaulay Duration divided by one plus the coupon rate    of the security. It represents the percentage change in the securities’ price    for a 100 basis points change in yield. It is generally accurate for only    small changes in the yield.
MD = - dP /dY x 1/P
Where, MD= Modified Duration
P= Gross price (i.e. clean price plus accrued interest)
dP= Corresponding small change in price
dY = Small change in yield compounded with the    frequency of the coupon payment.
Mortgage-backed security
A bond-type security in which the collateral is    provided by a pool of mortgages. Income from the    underlying mortgages is used to meet interest    and principal repayments.
Mutual    Fund
Mutual Fund is a mechanism for pooling the resources by issuing units to the investors and investing funds in securities in accordance with objectives as disclosed in offer document. A fund established in the form of a trust to raise monies through the sale of units to the public    or a section of the public under one or more    schemes for investing in securities, including money market    instruments.
Net Interest Margin
Net interest margin is the net interest income divided    by average interest earning assets
Net    NPA
Net    NPA = Gross NPA – (Balance in Interest Suspense    account + DICGC/ECGC claims received and held pending adjustment +    Part payment received and kept in suspense account    + Total provisions held)‘
Nostro accounts
Foreign currency settlement accounts that a bank maintains with its overseas correspondent banks. These    accounts are assets of the domestic bank.
Off-Balance    Sheet exposures
Off-Balance Sheet exposures    refer to the business activities of a bank that    generally do not involve booking assets    (loans) and taking deposits.    Off-balance sheet activities normally generate fees, but produce liabilities or assets that are deferred or contingent and thus, do not appear on the institution's balance sheet until or unless they become actual assets or liabilities.
Open position
It is the net difference between the amounts payable and amounts receivable in a particular instrument or commodity. It results from the existence    of a net long or net short position in the particular instrument or    commodity.
Option
An option is a contract which grants the buyer    the right, but not the obligation, to buy (call    option) or sell (put option)    an asset, commodity,    currency or financial instrument at an    agreed rate (exercise price) on or before an agreed date (expiry or settlement date). The buyer pays the seller an amount called the premium in exchange for this right. This premium is the price of the option.
Risk
The possibility of an outcome not occurring as expected. It can be measured and is not the same    as uncertainty, which is not measurable. In    financial terms, risk refers to the possibility of financial loss. It can be classified as credit    risk, market risk and operational risk.
Risk Asset Ratio
A bank's risk asset    ratio is the ratio of a bank's risk assets    to its capital funds. Risk assets include    assets other than highly rated government and    government agency obligations and cash, for example, corporate bonds and loans. The capital funds include capital and undistributed reserves. The lower the risk asset ratio the better the bank's    'capital cushion'
Risk    Weights
Basel II sets out a risk-weighting schedule for measuring the credit risk of obligors. The risk weights are linked to ratings given to sovereigns, financial institutions    and corporations by external credit    rating agencies.
Securitisation
The process whereby similar debt instruments/assets    are pooled together and repackaged    into marketable securities which can    be sold to investors. The process of loan securitisation is used by    banks to move their assets off the balance    sheet in order to improve their capital asset ratios.
Short position
A short position refers to a position where gains arise from a decline in the value of the underlying. It also refers to the sale of a security in which the seller does not have a long position.
Specific risk
Within the framework of the BIS proposals on market risk, specific risk refers to the risk associated with a specific security, issuer or company, as opposed to the risk associated with    a market or market sector (general risk).
Subordinated debt
Refers to the status of the debt. In the event of the bankruptcy or liquidation of the debtor, subordinated    debt only has a secondary claim on    repayments, after other debt has been repaid.
Tier one (or Tier I) capital
A term used to refer to one of the    components of regulatory capital. It    consists mainly of share capital and    disclosed reserves (minus goodwill, if any). Tier I items are deemed    to be of the highest quality because they    are fully available to cover losses. The other categories of capital defined in Basel II are Tier II (or supplementary) capital and Tier III (or additional supplementary) capital.
Tier two (or Tier II) capital
Refers to one of components of regulatory capital. Also known as supplementary capital, it consists of certain reserves and certain types of subordinated debt. Tier II items qualify as    regulatory capital to the extent that they can be    used to absorb losses arising from a bank's activities.    Tier II's capital loss absorption capacity is lower than    that of Tier I capital.
Trading Book
A trading book or portfolio refers to the book of financial instruments held for the purpose of short-term trading, as opposed to securities that would be held as a long-term investment. The    trading book refers to the assets that are held    primarily for generating profit on short- term differences in    prices/yields. The price risk is the prime concern of banks in trading book.
Underwrite
Generally, to    underwrite means to assume a risk for a fee. Its two most common contexts are:
a) Securities: a    dealer or investment bank agrees to    purchase a new issue of securities from    the issuer and distribute these securities to    investors. The underwriter may be one person or part of an underwriting syndicate. Thus the issuer faces no risk of being left with unsold    securities.
b) Insurance: a    person or company agrees to provide financial compensation against    the risk of fire, theft, death, disability,    etc., for a fee called a premium.
Undisclosed Reserves
These reserves often    serve as a cushion against    unexpected losses, but they are less permanent    in nature and cannot be considered as ‘Core Capital’. Revaluation    reserves arise from revaluation of assets    that are undervalued on the bank’s    books, typically bank premises and    marketable securities. The extent    to which the revaluation reserves can be relied upon as a cushion for    unexpected losses depends mainly    upon the level of certainty that    can be placed on estimates of the market values of the relevant    assets, the subsequent deterioration in    values under difficult market    conditions or in a forced sale, potential for actual liquidation at    those values, tax consequences of revaluation, etc.
Value at risk (VAR)
It is a method for calculating and controlling exposure to market risk. VAR is a single number (currency amount) which estimates the maximum expected loss of a portfolio over a given time horizon (the holding period) and at    a given confidence level.
Venture capital Fund
A fund with the    purpose of investing in start‑up    businesses that is perceived to have excellent    growth prospects but does not have access to capital markets.
Vertical    Disallowance
In    the BIS Method for determining regulatory capital    necessary to cushion market risk, a reversal of the offsets of a    general risk charge of a long position by    a short position in two or more    securities in the same time band in the yield curve where the securities have differing credit risks.
1
Unless all their written option positions are  hedged by perfectly matched long positions in exactly the same options,  in which case no capital charge for market risk is required
2
In some cases such as foreign exchange, it may be  unclear which side is the "underlying security"; this should be taken to be the asset which would be  received if the option were exercised. In addition the nominal value should be used for items where the  market value of the underlying instrument could be zero, e.g. caps and  floors, swaptions etc.
3
Some options (e.g.  where the underlying is an interest rate or a currency) bear no specific risk,  but specific risk will be present in the case  of options on certain interest rate-related instruments (e.g. options on a corporate debt security or corporate bond index;  see paragraph 2.2.5 for the relevant capital charges) and for options on equities and stock indices (see  paragraph 2.2.6). The charge under this measure for currency options  will be 9%.
4
For options with a  residual maturity of more than six months, the strike price should be compared  with the forward, not current, price. A bank unable to do this must take the  "in-the-money" amount to be zero.
5
Where the position does not fall within the trading book (i.e. options on  certain foreign exchange or commodities positions not belonging  to the trading book), it may be acceptable to use the book value instead.
6
Reserve Bank of India may wish to require banks doing business in  certain classes of exotic options (e.g. barriers, digitals) or in options  "at-the-money" that are close to expiry to use either the scenario  approach or the internal models alternative, both of which can accommodate more  detailed revaluation approaches.
7
A two-months call  option on a bond future, where delivery of the bond takes place in September,  would be considered in April as being long the bond and short a  five-months deposit, both positions being delta- weighted.
8
The rules applying to  closely-matched positions set out in paragraph 2.2.5.5.1.2 will also apply in  this respect.
9
The basic rules set out  here for interest rate and equity options do not attempt to capture specific  risk when calculating  gamma capital charges. However, Reserve Bank may require specific banks to do  so.
10
Positions  have to be slotted into separate maturity ladders by currency.
11
Banks using the duration method should use  the time-bands as set out in Annex.8
12
If,  for example, the time-bands 3 to 4 years, 4 to 5 years and 5 to 7 years are  combined, the highest assumed change in yield of these  three bands would be 0.75.