(111 kb)
Master Circular - Guidelines for Issue of Commercial Paper
RBI/2014-15/100
IDMD.PCD.04/14.01.02/2014-15
July  1, 2014
All  market participants
Dear  Sir/Madam,
Master Circular - Guidelines for Issue of Commercial  Paper
Commercial Paper (CP), an  unsecured money market instrument issued in the form of a promissory note, was  introduced in India in 1990 with a view to enable highly rated corporate  borrowers to diversify their sources of short-term borrowings and provide an  additional instrument to the investors.
2. A
Master Circular
incorporating all the  existing guidelines/instructions/ directives on the subject has been prepared  for reference of the market participants and others concerned. It may be noted  that this Master Circular consolidates all the instructions/guidelines/notifications  contained in the circulars listed in the Appendix in so far as they relate to  guidelines for issue of CP. This Master Circular has been placed on RBI website  at
www.mastercirculars.rbi.org.in
.
Yours  faithfully
(Rekha Warriar)
Chief General Manager
Encl.:  As above
Table of    Content
Sl. No.
Topic
1
Introduction
2
Eligibility for Issue of CP
3
Issue of CP – Credit enhancement, limits, etc
4
Eligibility for Investment in CP
5
Form of the Instrument, mode of issuance and redemption
5.1
Form
5.2
Tenor
5.3
Procedure for Issuance
5.4
Rating Requirement
5.5
Investment/Redemption
5.6
Documentation Procedures
6
Trading and Settlement of CP
7
Buyback of CP
8
Duties and Obligations
9
Non-applicability of Certain Other Directions
Schedules
Schedule I –Proforma    of CP
Schedule II –    IPA Certificate
Schedule    III- Details of Defaults on  Repayment    of CP
Schedule    IV- Reporting of buyback of CPs
Definitions
Appendix: List of Circulars Consolidated
1. Introduction
Commercial  Paper (CP) is an unsecured money market instrument issued in the form of a  promissory note. CP, as a privately placed instrument, was introduced in India  in 1990 with a view to enable highly rated corporate borrowers to diversify  their sources of short-term borrowings and to provide an additional instrument  to investors. Subsequently, primary dealers (PDs) and all-India financial  institutions (FIs) were also permitted to issue CP to enable them to meet their  short-term funding requirements. The guidelines for issue of CP, incorporating  all the amendments issued till date, are given below for ready reference.
2.  Eligibility for Issue of CP:
a. Companies, PDs and FIs  are permitted to raise short term resources through CP.
b. A company would be  eligible to issue CP provided:
the tangible net worth of the company, as per  the latest audited balance sheet, is not less than Rs.4 crore;
the company has been  sanctioned working capital limit by bank/s or FIs; and
the  borrowal account of the company is classified as a Standard Asset by the financing  bank/institution.
3.  Issue of CP – Credit enhancement, limits, etc.
a. CP shall be issued as a ‘stand alone’ product. Further,  it would not be obligatory in any manner on the part of the banks and FIs to  provide stand-by facility to the issuers of CP.
b. Banks and FIs may, based on their commercial judgement,  subject to the prudential norms as applicable to them, with the specific  approval of their respective Boards, choose to provide stand-by  assistance/credit, back-stop facility etc. by way of credit enhancement for a  CP issue.
c. Non-bank entities (including corporates) may provide  unconditional and irrevocable guarantee for credit enhancement for CP issue  provided:
the issuer fulfils the eligibility criteria prescribed  for issuance of CP;
the guarantor has a credit rating at least one notch  higher than the issuer given by an approved CRA; and
the offer document for CP properly discloses the net  worth of the guarantor company, the names of the companies to which the  guarantor has issued similar guarantees, the extent of the guarantees offered  by the guarantor company, and the conditions under which the guarantee will be  invoked.
d. The aggregate amount of CP that can be issued by an  issuer shall at all times be within the limit as approved by its Board of  Directors or the quantum indicated by the CRA for the specified rating,  whichever is lower.
e. Banks and FIs shall have the flexibility to fix working  capital limits, duly taking into account the resource pattern of company’s  financing, including CP.
f. An issue of CP by an FI shall be  within the  overall umbrella limit prescribed in the Master Circular on Resource Raising  Norms for FIs, issued by the Reserve Bank of India, Department of Banking  Operations and Development, as  prescribed/ updated from time-to-time.
g. The total amount of CP proposed to be issued should be  raised within a period of two weeks from the date on which the issuer opens the  issue for subscription. CP may be issued on a single date or in parts on  different dates provided that in the latter case, each CP shall have the same  maturity date.
h. Every issue of CP, and  every renewal of a CP, shall be treated as a fresh issue.
4.  Eligibility for Investment in CP
Individuals, banks, other corporate bodies  (registered or incorporated in India) and unincorporated bodies, Non-Resident  Indians and Foreign Institutional Investors (FIIs) shall be eligible to invest  in CP.
FIIs  shall be eligible to invest in CPs subject to (i) such conditions as  may be set for them by Securities Exchange Board of India  (SEBI) and (ii) compliance with the provisions of the Foreign  Exchange Management Act, 1999, the Foreign Exchange (Deposit) Regulations, 2000  and the Foreign Exchange Management (Transfer or Issue of Security by a Person  Resident Outside India) Regulations, 2000, as amended from time to time.
5.  Form of the Instrument, mode of issuance and redemption
5.1  Form
CP shall be issued in the form of a promissory note (as  specified in
Schedule I
to these Guidelines) and held in  physical form or in a dematerialized form through any of the depositories  approved by and registered with SEBI, provided that all RBI regulated entities  can  deal in and hold CP only in dematerialised form through such  depositories.
Fresh investments by all RBI-regulated entities shall  be only in dematerialised form.
CP shall be issued in denominations of
`
5 lakh and multiples thereof. The  amount invested by a single investor should not be less than
`
5 lakh (face value).
CP shall be issued at a discount to face value as may  be determined by the issuer.
No issuer shall have the issue of CP underwritten or  co-accepted.
Options (call/put) are not permitted on CP.
5.2 Tenor
CP shall be issued for maturities between a minimum of  7 days and a maximum of up to one year from the date of issue.
The maturity date of the CP shall not go beyond the  date up to which the credit rating of the issuer is valid.
5.3. Procedure for Issuance
Every issuer must appoint an IPA for issuance of CP.
The issuer should disclose to the potential investors,  its latest financial position as per the standard market practice.
After the exchange of confirmation of the deal between  the investor and the issuer, the issuer shall arrange for crediting the CP to  the Demat account of the investor with the depository through the IPA.
The issuer shall give to the investor a copy of IPA  certificate to the effect that the issuer has a valid agreement with the IPA  and documents are in order (
Schedule II)
.
5.4   Rating Requirement
Eligible  participants/issuers shall obtain credit rating for issuance of CP from any one  of the SEBI registered CRAs.
The minimum  credit rating shall be ‘A3’ as per rating symbol and definition prescribed by  SEBI.
The issuers shall ensure at the time of issuance of the CP  that the rating so obtained is current and has not fallen due for review.
5.5. Investment / Redemption
The investor in CP (primary subscriber) shall pay the  discounted value of the CP to the account of the issuer through the IPA.
The investor holding the CP in physical form shall, on  maturity, present the instrument for payment to the issuer through the IPA.
The holder of a CP in dematerialised form shall get the  CP redeemed and receive payment through the IPA.
5.6 Documentation Procedures
Standardised procedures and  documentation for CPs are prescribed in consultation with Fixed Income Money  Market and Derivatives Association of India (FIMMDA) in consonance with  international best practices.
Issuers /IPAs shall follow the operational guidelines  issued by FIMMDA, from time to time, with the approval of RBI.
6. Trading and Settlement of CP
All OTC trades in CP shall be reported within 15  minutes of the trade to the reporting platform of Clearcorp Dealing System  (India) Ltd.(CDSIL).
OTC trades in CP shall be settled through the clearing  house of the National Stock Exchange (NSE), i.e., the National Securities  Clearing Corporation Limited (NSCCL), the clearing house of the Bombay Stock  Exchange (BSE), i.e., Indian Clearing Corporation Limited (ICCL), and the  clearing house of the MCX-Stock Exchange, i.e., MCX-SX Clearing Corporation  Limited (CCL), as per the norms specified by NSCCL, ICCL and CCL from time to  time.
The settlement cycle for OTC trades in CP shall either  be T+0 or T+1.
7. Buyback of CP
Issuers may buyback the CP, issued by them to  the investors, before maturity.
Buyback of CP  shall be through the secondary market and at prevailing market price.
The  CP shall not be bought back before a minimum period of 7 days from the date of  issue.
Issuer shall intimate the IPA of the buyback  undertaken.
Buyback  of CPs should be undertaken after taking approval from the Board of Directors.
8.  Duties and Obligations
The duties and obligations of the Issuer, IPA and CRA are set  out below:
I. Issuer
The issuer shall ensure that the guidelines and procedures  laid down for the issuance of CP are strictly adhered to.
II. IPA
The IPA shall ensure that the issuer has the minimum  credit rating as stipulated by RBI and the amount mobilised through issuance of  CP is within the quantum indicated by CRA for the specified rating or as  approved by its Board of Directors, whichever is lower.
The IPA shall certify that it has a valid agreement  with the issuer (
Schedule II
).
The IPA shall verify that all the documents submitted  by the issuer, viz., copy of board resolution, signatures of authorised  executants (when CP is issued in physical form) are in order and shall issue a  certificate to this effect.
Certified copies of original documents, verified by the  IPA, shall be held in the custody of IPA.
All scheduled banks, acting as IPAs, shall report the  details of issuance of CP on the Online Returns Filing System (ORFS) module of  the RBI within two days from the date of issuance of the CP.
IPAs, shall immediately report, on occurrence, full  particulars of defaults in repayment of CP to the Chief General Manager,  Financial Markets Department, Reserve Bank of India, Central Office, Fort,  Mumbai-400001 (
email
)  in the format as given in
Schedule  III
of these guidelines.
IPAs shall also report all instances of buyback of CPs  undertaken by the issuer to the Chief General Manager, Financial Markets  Department, Reserve Bank of India, Central Office, Fort, Mumbai–400001 (
email
) in the format as  given in
Schedule IV
of these guidelines.
III. CRA
CRAs shall abide by the Code of Conduct prescribed by  the SEBI for CRAs for undertaking rating of capital market instruments, which  shall be applicable for rating CPs.
The CRAs shall have the discretion to determine the  validity period of the rating depending upon their perception about the  strength of the issuer; and they shall, at the time of rating, clearly indicate  the date when the rating is due for review.
The CRAs shall closely monitor the rating assigned to  issuers vis-à-vis their track record at regular intervals and shall make their  revision in the ratings public through their publications and website.
9.  Non-applicability of Certain Other Directions
Nothing contained in the Non-Banking Financial Companies  Acceptance of Public Deposits (Reserve Bank) Directions, 1998 shall apply to  the acceptance of deposit by issuance of CP, by any NBFC in accordance  with these guidelines.
10.
Definitions
of certain terms used in the Guidelines are  provided in
Annex.
Annex
Definitions
In these guidelines, unless the context otherwise  requires:
‘RBI’  means the Reserve Bank of India.
Banks’  means a banking company as defined in clause (c) of Section 5 of the Banking  Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949) or a “corresponding new bank”, “State Bank of  India” or a “subsidiary bank” as defined in clause (da), clause (nc) and clause  (nd) respectively thereof and includes a “cooperative bank” as defined in  clause (cci) of Section 5 read with Section 56 of the said Act.
Scheduled  bank’ means a bank included in the Second Schedule of the RBI Act, 1934.
All India Financial  Institution’ (FI) means an all India Financial Institution specified in  the  list indicated at Annex 3 to the
RBI  Master Circular DBOD.No.Dir.BC.3/13.03.00/2012-13 dated July 02, 2012
on  Exposure Norms as amended from time to time.
Primary  Dealer (PD) means a Non-Banking Financial Company (NBFC) that holds a valid  letter of authorisation as a PD issued by the Reserve Bank, in terms of the  "Guidelines for Primary Dealer in Government Securities Market" dated  March 29, 1995, as amended from time to time.
Company’  means a company as defined in section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956.
Issuing  and Paying Agent (IPA)’ means a Scheduled Bank acting as an IPA.
CRA’   means a Credit Rating Agency registered with Securities Exchange Board of  India.
CP’ means Commercial  paper issued in accordance with the guidelines in this master circular.
Words and expressions used but not defined  herein and defined in the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 shall have the same  meaning as assigned to them in the said Act.
Appendix
List of circulars consolidated
Sr.
No
Reference    No.
Date
Subject
1.
IDMD.PCD.20/14.01.02/2011-12
March 5, 2012
Settlement of OTC transactions in    Certificates of Deposit (CDs) and Commercial Papers (CPs)
2.
IDMD.PCD.07/14.01.02/2012-13
January 1, 2013
Guidelines for Issue of Commercial    Paper (CP)
3.
IDMD.PCD.12/14.03.02/2012-13
June 26, 2013
Settlement of OTC transactions in Certificates of Deposit (CDs) and    Commercial Papers (CPs)
4.
IDMD.PCD.13/14.01.02/2013-14
June 25, 2014
Reporting of    OTC transactions on F-TRAC-Hiving off to CDSIL