(227 kb)
Master Circular - Priority Sector Lending-Targets and Classification
RBI/2014-15/95
RPCD.CO.Plan.BC 10/04.09.01/2014-15
July  01, 2014
The Chairman/ Managing Director/
Chief Executive Officer
[All scheduled commercial banks
(excluding Regional  Rural Banks)]
Dear  Sir,
MASTER  CIRCULAR - PRIORITY SECTOR LENDING-TARGETS AND CLASSIFICATION
The  Reserve Bank of India has, from time to time, issued a number of  guidelines/instructions/directives to banks on Priority Sector Lending. In  order to enable the banks to have current instructions at one place, a Master  Circular incorporating the existing guidelines/instructions/directives on the  subject has been prepared and enclosed. This
Master Circular
consolidates the  current instructions of all the circulars/mail box clarifications issued by  Reserve Bank on the subject up to June 30, 2014 as indicated in the
Appendix
.
2.  Please acknowledge receipt.
Yours  faithfully,
(A.  Udgata)
Principal Chief  General Manager
Encl: As above
Introduction
At a meeting of the  National Credit Council held in July 1968, it was emphasised that commercial  banks should increase their involvement in the financing of priority sectors,  viz., agriculture and small scale industries. The description of the priority  sectors was later formalised in 1972 on the basis of the report submitted by  the Informal Study Group on Statistics relating to advances to the Priority  Sectors constituted by the Reserve Bank in May 1971. On the basis of this  report, the Reserve Bank prescribed a modified return for reporting priority  sector advances and certain guidelines were issued in this connection  indicating the scope of the items to be included under the various categories  of priority sector. Although initially there was no specific target fixed in  respect of priority sector lending, in November 1974 the banks were advised to  raise the share of these sectors in their aggregate advances to the level of 33  1/3 percent by March 1979.
At a meeting of the  Union Finance Minister with the Chief Executive Officers of public sector banks  held in March 1980, it was agreed that banks should aim at raising the  proportion of their advances to priority sector to 40 percent by March 1985.  Subsequently, on the basis of the recommendations of the Working Group on the  Modalities of Implementation of Priority Sector Lending and the Twenty Point  Economic Programme by Banks (Chairman: Dr.  K. S. Krishnaswamy), all commercial banks were advised to achieve the  target of priority sector lending at 40 percent of aggregate bank advances by  1985. Sub-targets were also specified for lending to agriculture and the weaker  sections within the priority sector. Since then, there have been several  changes in the scope of priority sector lending and the targets and sub-targets  applicable to various bank groups.
The guidelines were  revised in the year 2007 based on the recommendations made in September 2005 by  the Internal Working Group of the RBI (Chairman: Shri C. S. Murthy). The  Sub-Committee of the Central Board of the Reserve Bank (Chairman: Shri Y. H.  Malegam) constituted to study issues and concerns in the Micro Finance  institutions (MFI) sector, inter alia, had recommended review of the guidelines  on priority sector lending.
Accordingly, Reserve  Bank of India in August 2011 set up a Committee to re-examine the existing  classification and suggest revised guidelines with regard to Priority Sector  lending classification and related issues (Chairman: M V Nair). The  recommendations of the committee were placed in the public domain inviting  public comments. The recommendations of the Committee were  examined based on the interface with various stakeholders and in the light of  the comments / suggestions received from Government of India, banks, financial  institutions, Non-Banking Financial Companies, Associations of industries, public  and Indian Banks’ Association; and revised guidelines were issued on July 20,  2012 in supersession of guidelines mentioned in the master circular on priority  sector lending dated July 2, 2012.
The revised guidelines  are operational with effect from July 20, 2012. The priority sector loans  sanctioned under the guidelines issued prior to this date will continue to be  classified under priority sector till maturity/renewal.
I. Categories under priority sector
(i) Agriculture
(ii) Micro and Small Enterprises
(iii) Education
(iv) Housing
(v) Export Credit
(vi) Others
The eligible activities under the above  categories are specified in paragraph III
II. Targets / Sub-targets for Priority sector
(i) The targets and sub-targets set under  priority sector lending for domestic and foreign banks operating in India are  furnished below:
Categories
Domestic    commercial banks / Foreign banks with 20 and above branches
Foreign    banks with less than 20 branches
Total    Priority Sector
40 percent of Adjusted Net Bank Credit    [ANBC defined in sub paragraph (iii) below] or credit equivalent amount of    Off-Balance Sheet Exposure, whichever is higher.
32 percent of ANBC or credit    equivalent amount of Off-Balance Sheet Exposure, whichever is higher.
Total    agriculture
18 percent of ANBC or credit    equivalent amount of Off-Balance Sheet Exposure, whichever is higher.
Of this, indirect lending in excess of    4.5% of ANBC or credit equivalent amount of Off-Balance Sheet Exposure,    whichever is higher, will not be reckoned for computing achievement under 18    percent target. However, all agricultural loans under the categories 'direct'    and 'indirect' will be reckoned in computing achievement under the overall priority    sector target of 40 percent of ANBC or credit equivalent amount of    Off-Balance Sheet Exposure, whichever is higher.
No specific target. Forms part of    total priority sector target.
Micro    & Small Enterprises (MSE)
Advances to micro and small    enterprises sector will be reckoned in computing achievement under the overall    priority sector target of 40 percent of ANBC or credit equivalent amount of    Off-Balance Sheet Exposure, whichever is higher.
No specific target. Forms part of    total priority sector target.
(i) 40    percent of total advances to micro and small enterprises sector should go to    Micro (manufacturing) enterprises having investment in plant and machinery up    to
`
10 lakh
and micro (service) enterprises having investment in equipment up to
`
4 lakh
;
(ii)    20 percent of total advances to micro and small enterprises sector should go    to Micro (manufacturing) enterprises with investment in plant and machinery    above
`
10 lakh
and up to
`
25 lakh,
and micro (service) enterprises with investment in    equipment above
`
4 lakh
and up to
`
10 lakh.
(For details, please refer Reserve    Bank’s Master Circular on Lending to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises    (MSME) Sector)
Export    Credit
Export    credit is not a separate category. Export credit to eligible activities under    agriculture and MSE will be reckoned for priority sector lending under    respective categories.
No specific target. Forms part of    total priority sector target.
Advances    to Weaker Sections
10 percent of ANBC or credit    equivalent amount of Off-Balance Sheet Exposure, whichever is higher.
No specific    target in the total priority sector target.
(ii) For foreign banks with 20 and above  branches, priority sector targets and sub-targets have to be achieved within a  maximum period of five years starting from April 1, 2013 and ending on March  31, 2018 as per the action plans submitted by them as approved by RBI. Any  subsequent reference to these banks in the circular, will be in accordance to  the approved plans.
(iii) The current year’s targets for priority  sectors and sub-targets will be computed based on Adjusted Net Bank Credit  (ANBC) or credit equivalent of Off-Balance Sheet Exposures of preceding March  31st. The outstanding  priority sector loans as on March 31st of the current year will be  reckoned for achievement of priority sector targets and sub-targets. For the purpose  of priority sector lending, ANBC denotes the outstanding Bank Credit in India  [(As prescribed in item No.VI of Form ‘A’ (Special Return as on March 31st)  under Section 42 (2) of the RBI Act, 1934] minus bills rediscounted with RBI  and other approved Financial Institutions plus permitted non SLR bonds/debentures  in Held to Maturity (HTM) category plus other investments eligible to be  treated as part of priority sector lending (eg. investments in securitised  assets). Outstanding deposits, as on  preceding March 31st, under RIDF, Warehouse Infrastructure Fund,  Short term Co-operative Rural Credit Refinance Fund and Short Term RRB Fund  with NABARD will form part of ANBC. Deposits  placed by banks with SIDBI/NHB, as the case may be, in lieu of non-achievement  of priority sector lending targets/sub-targets, though shown under Schedule 8 –  'Investments' in the Balance Sheet at item I (vi) – 'Others', will not be  reckoned for ANBC computation. Advances extended in India against the  incremental FCNR (B)/NRE deposits, qualifying for exemption from CRR/SLR  requirements, as per the Reserve Bank’s circulars
DBOD.No.Ref.BC.36/12.01.001/2013-14 dated August 14, 2013
read with
DBOD.No.Ref.BC.93/12.01.001/2013-14  dated January 31, 2014
and DBOD mailbox clarification issued on February 6,  2014 will be excluded from the ANBC for computation of priority sector lending  targets, till their repayment. For the purpose of calculation of credit  equivalent of off-balance sheet exposures, banks may be guided by the  master circular on exposure norms issued by our Department of Banking  Operations and Development.
Computation  of Adjusted Net Bank Credit
Bank Credit in India (As prescribed in    item No.VI of Form ‘A’ (Special Return as on March 31st) under    Section 42 (2) of the RBI Act, 1934.
I
Bills Rediscounted with RBI and other    approved Financial Institutions + Advances extended in India against the incremental FCNR (B)/NRE deposits,    qualifying for exemption from CRR/SLR requirements, till their maturity.
II
Net Bank Credit (NBC)*
III(I-II)
Bonds/debentures in Non-SLR categories    under HTM category + other investments eligible to be treated as priority    sector + Outstanding Deposits, as on preceding March 31st, under    RIDF, Warehouse Infrastructure Fund, Short term Co-operative Rural Credit    Refinance Fund and Short Term RRB Fund with NABARD
IV
ANBC
III+IV
* For the purpose of priority sector only. Banks  should not deduct / net any amount like provisions, accrued interest, etc. from  NBC.
It has been observed that some banks are subtracting  prudential write off at Corporate/Head Office level while reporting Bank Credit  as above. In such cases it must be ensured that bank credit to priority sector  and all other sub-sectors so written off should also be subtracted category  wise from priority sector and sub-target achievement.
All types of loans, investments or any other item  which are treated as eligible for classifications under priority sector  target/sub-target achievement should also form part of Adjusted Net Bank  Credit.
(iv) The targets for Micro Enterprises within  the Micro and Small Enterprises segment (MSE) will be computed with reference  to the outstanding credit to MSE as on preceding March 31st.
III Description of  the Categories under priority sector
1. Agriculture
1.1 Direct Agriculture
1.1.1 Loans to individual farmers [including  Self Help Groups (SHGs) or Joint Liability Groups (JLGs), i.e. groups of  individual farmers, provided banks maintain disaggregated data of such loans], directly  engaged in Agriculture and Allied Activities,
viz.,
dairy, fishery,  animal husbandry, poultry, bee-keeping and sericulture (up to cocoon stage).
(i) Short-term loans to farmers  for raising crops, i.e. crop loans.
This  will include traditional/non-traditional plantations, horticulture and allied  activities.
(ii) Medium  & long-term loans to farmers for agriculture and allied activities (e.g.  purchase of agricultural implements and machinery, loans for irrigation and  other developmental activities undertaken in the farm, and development loans  for allied activities).
(iii)  Loans to farmers for pre and post-harvest activities, viz., spraying,  weeding, harvesting, sorting, grading and transporting of their own farm  produce.
(iv) Loans to farmers up to
`
50 lakh against  pledge / hypothecation of agricultural produce (including warehouse receipts) for  a period not exceeding 12 months, irrespective of whether the farmers were  given crop loans or not.
(v) Loans to small and marginal farmers for purchase of land for  agricultural purposes.
(vi) Loans to distressed farmers indebted to non-institutional lenders.
(vii) Bank loans to Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS),  Farmers’ Service Societies (FSS) and Large-sized Adivasi Multi Purpose  Societies (LAMPS) ceded to or managed/ controlled by such banks for on lending  to farmers for agricultural and allied activities.
(viii) Loans to farmers under Kisan Credit Card Scheme.
(ix)  Export credit to farmers for exporting their own farm produce.
1.1.2 Loans to corporates  including farmers' producer companies of individual farmers, partnership firms  and co-operatives of farmers directly engaged in Agriculture and Allied  Activities,
viz.,
dairy, fishery, animal husbandry, poultry, bee-keeping  and sericulture (up to cocoon stage) up to an aggregate limit of
`
2 crore per borrower for the following activities:
(i) Short-term loans to farmers  for raising crops, i.e. crop loans.
This will include  traditional/non-traditional plantations, horticulture and allied activities.
(ii) Medium  & long-term loans to farmers for agriculture and allied activities (e.g.  purchase of agricultural implements and machinery, loans for irrigation and  other developmental activities undertaken in the farm, and development loans  for allied activities).
(iii)  Loans to farmers for pre and post-harvest activities, viz., spraying,  weeding, harvesting, grading and sorting.
(iv)  Export credit for exporting their own farm produce.
1.2. Indirect agriculture
1.2.1. Loans to corporates  including farmers' producer companies of individual farmers, partnership firms  and co-operatives of farmers directly engaged in Agriculture and Allied  Activities,
viz.,
dairy, fishery, animal husbandry, poultry, bee-keeping  and sericulture (up to cocoon stage)
(i) If  the aggregate loan limit per borrower is more than
`
2 crore in respect of para. (III)  (1.1.2) of this circular, the entire loan should be treated as indirect finance to  agriculture.
(ii)  Loans up to
`
50 lakh against  pledge/hypothecation of agricultural produce (including warehouse receipts) for  a period not exceeding 12 months, irrespective of whether the farmers were  given crop loans or not.
1.2.2
Bank loans to Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS), Farmers’ Service  Societies (FSS) and Large-sized Adivasi Multi Purpose Societies (LAMPS) other  than those covered under paragraph III (1.1.1) (vii) of this circular.
1.2.3. Other indirect agriculture loans
(i)  Loans up to
`
5 crore per  borrower to dealers /sellers of fertilizers, pesticides, seeds, cattle feed,  poultry feed, agricultural implements and other inputs for agriculture and  allied activities.
(ii)  Loans for setting up of Agriclinics and Agribusiness Centres.
(iii) Loans up to
`
5 crore to cooperative  societies of farmers for disposing of the produce of members.
(iv)  Loans to Custom Service Units managed by individuals, institutions or organizations  who maintain a fleet of tractors, bulldozers, well-boring equipment, threshers,  combines, etc., and undertake farm work for farmers on contract basis.
(v)  Loans for construction and running of storage facilities (warehouse, market  yards, godowns and silos), including cold storage units designed to store  agriculture produce/products, irrespective of their location.
If  the storage unit is a micro or small enterprise, such loans will be classified  under loans to Micro and Small Enterprises sector.
(vi)  Loans to MFIs for on-lending to farmers for agricultural and allied activities  as per the conditions specified in paragraph VIII of this circular.
(vii)  Loans sanctioned to NGOs, which are SHG Promoting Institutions, for on-lending  to members of SHGs under SHG-Bank Linkage Programme for agricultural and allied  activities. The all inclusive interest  charged by the NGO/SHG promoting entity should not exceed the Base Rate of the  lending bank plus eight percent per annum.
(viii)  Loans sanctioned to RRBs for on-lending to agriculture and allied activities.
(ix) Outstanding deposits, as on March 31st  of the current year, under RIDF, Warehouse Infrastructure Fund, Short term  Co-operative Rural Credit Refinance Fund and Short Term RRB Fund with NABARD.
2. Micro and Small Enterprises
The limits for investment in plant and  machinery/equipment for manufacturing / service enterprise, as notified by  Ministry of Micro Small and Medium Enterprises, vide, S.O.1642(E) dated  September 9, 2006 are as under:-
Manufacturing    sector
Enterprises
Investment    in plant and machinery
Micro Enterprises
Do not exceed twenty five lakh rupees
Small Enterprises
More than twenty five lakh rupees but does not exceed five crore    rupees
Service    Sector
Enterprises
Investment    in equipment
Micro Enterprises
Does not exceed ten lakh rupees
Small Enterprises
More than ten lakh rupees but does not    exceed two crore rupees
Bank loans to micro and small enterprises both  manufacturing and service are eligible to be classified under priority sector  as per the following:
2.1. Direct Finance
2.1.1. Manufacturing Enterprises
The Micro and Small  enterprises engaged in the manufacture or production of goods to any industry  specified in the first schedule to the Industries (Development and regulation)  Act, 1951 and as notified by the Government from time to time. The  manufacturing enterprises are defined in terms of investment in plant and  machinery.
2.1.1.1. Loans for food and agro processing
Loans for food and agro processing will be  classified under Micro and Small Enterprises, provided the units satisfy  investments criteria prescribed for Micro and Small Enterprises, as provided in  MSMED Act, 2006.
2.1.2. Service Enterprises
Bank loans up to
`
5 crore per unit to Micro and Small Enterprises  engaged in providing or rendering of services and defined in terms of  investment in equipment under MSMED Act, 2006.
2.1.3.
Export credit to MSE units (both manufacturing and services) for exporting of  goods/services produced/rendered by them.
2.1.4.
Non-farm  entrepreneurial credit outstanding under General Credit Card.
2.1.5 Khadi and Village Industries Sector (KVI)
All loans sanctioned  to units in the KVI sector, irrespective of their size of operations, location  and amount of original investment in plant and machinery. Such loans will be  eligible for classification under the sub-target of 60 percent prescribed for  micro enterprises within the micro and small enterprises segment under priority  sector.
2.2. Indirect Finance
(i)  Loans to persons involved in assisting the decentralized sector in the supply  of inputs to and marketing of outputs of artisans, village and cottage  industries.
(ii)  Loans to cooperatives of producers in the decentralized sector viz. artisans  village and cottage industries.
(iii) Loans sanctioned by banks to MFIs for on-lending  to MSE sector as per the conditions specified in paragraph VIII of this  circular.
3. Education
Loans to individuals for  educational purposes including vocational courses upto
`
10 lakh for studies in India  and
`
20 lakh for studies abroad.
4. Housing
(i)  Loans to individuals up to
`
25  lakh in metropolitan centres with population above ten lakh and
`
15  lakh in other centres for purchase/construction of a dwelling unit per family  excluding loans sanctioned to bank’s own employees.
(ii)  Loans for repairs to the damaged dwelling units of families up to
`
2  lakh in rural and semi- urban areas and up to
`
5  lakh in urban and metropolitan areas.
(iii)  Bank loans to any governmental agency for construction of dwelling units or for  slum clearance and rehabilitation of slum dwellers subject to a ceiling of
`
10  lakh per dwelling unit.
(iv) The loans sanctioned by banks for housing  projects exclusively for the purpose of construction of houses only to  economically weaker sections and low income groups, the total cost of which do  not exceed
`
10 lakh per dwelling unit. For the purpose of  identifying the economically weaker sections and low income groups, the family  income limit of
`
1,20,000 per annum, irrespective of the location, is  prescribed.
(v) Bank loans to Housing Finance Companies (HFCs),  approved by NHB for their refinance, for on-lending for the purpose of purchase/construction/reconstruction  of individual dwelling units or for slum clearance and rehabilitation of slum  dwellers, subject to an aggregate loan limit of
`
10 lakh per borrower, provided  the all inclusive interest rate charged to the ultimate borrower is not  exceeding lowest lending rate of the lending bank for housing loans plus two  percent per annum.
The eligibility under priority sector loans to  HFCs is restricted to five percent of the individual bank’s total priority  sector lending, on an ongoing basis. The maturity of bank loans should be  co-terminus with average maturity of loans extended by HFCs. Banks should maintain necessary borrower-wise  details of the underlying portfolio.
5. Export Credit
Export Credit  extended by foreign banks with less than 20 branches will be reckoned for  priority sector target achievement.
As  regards the domestic banks and foreign banks with 20 and above branches, export  credit is not a separate category under priority sector. Export credit  mentioned under paragraphs (III) (1.1.1) (ix), (III) (1.1.2) (iv), (III)  (1.2.1) (i) and (III) (2.1.3) of this circular will count towards the  respective categories of priority sector, i.e. Agriculture and MSE sector.
6. Others
6.1. Loans, not exceeding
`
50,000 per borrower provided directly by banks to  individuals and their SHG/JLG, provided  the borrower’s household annual income in rural areas does not exceed
`
60,000/- and for non-rural areas it should not  exceed
`
1,20,000/-.
6.2. Loans to distressed persons [other than farmers-already  included under III (1.1) (vi)] not exceeding
`
50,000 per borrower to prepay their debt to  non-institutional lenders.
6.3. Overdrafts, up to
`
50,000 (per account), granted against basic banking /  savings accounts provided the borrowers household annual income in rural areas  does not exceed
`
60,000/- and for non-rural areas it should not  exceed
`
1,20,000/-.
6.4.  Loans sanctioned to State Sponsored Organisations for Scheduled Castes/  Scheduled Tribes for the specific purpose of purchase and supply of inputs to  and/or the marketing of the outputs of the beneficiaries of these  organisations.
6.5. Loans sanctioned by  banks directly to individuals for setting up off-grid solar and other off-grid  renewable energy solutions for households.
IV Weaker Sections
Priority sector loans to the following borrowers  will be considered under Weaker Sections category:-
(a) Small and marginal farmers;
(b) Artisans, village  and cottage industries where individual credit limits do not exceed
`
50,000;
(c) Beneficiaries of  Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY), now National Rural Livelihood Mission  (NRLM);
(d) Scheduled Castes  and Scheduled Tribes;
(e) Beneficiaries of  Differential Rate of Interest (DRI) scheme;
(f) Beneficiaries  under Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY);
(g) Beneficiaries  under the Scheme for Rehabilitation of Manual Scavengers (SRMS);
(h) Loans to Self  Help Groups;
(i) Loans to  distressed farmers indebted to non-institutional lenders;
(j) Loans to distressed persons other than farmers not  exceeding
`
50,000 per borrower to  prepay their debt to non-institutional lenders;
(k) Loans to individual women beneficiaries upto
`
50,000 per borrower;
(l) Loans sanctioned  under (a) to (k) above to persons from minority communities as may be notified  by Government of India from time to time.
In States, where one of the minority communities notified is, in fact,  in majority, item (l) will cover only the other notified minorities. These  States/Union Territories are Jammu & Kashmir, Punjab, Meghalaya, Mizoram,  Nagaland and Lakshadweep.
V. Investments by banks in securitised assets
(i) Investments by banks in securitised assets,  representing loans to various categories of priority sector, except 'others'  category, are eligible for classification under respective categories of  priority sector (direct or indirect) depending on the underlying assets  provided:
(a) the securitised  assets are originated by banks and financial institutions and are eligible to  be classified as priority sector advances prior to securitisation and fulfil  the Reserve Bank of India guidelines on securitisation.
(b) the all inclusive  interest charged to the ultimate borrower by the originating entity should not  exceed the Base Rate of the investing bank plus 8 percent per annum.
The investments in securitised assets originated  by MFIs, which comply with the guidelines in Paragraph VIII of this circular  are exempted from this interest cap as there are separate caps on margin and  interest rate.
(ii) Investments made by banks in securitised  assets originated by NBFCs, where the underlying assets are loans against gold  jewellery, are not eligible for priority sector status.
VI.  Transfer of Assets through Direct Assignment /Outright purchases
(i) Assignments/Outright purchases of pool of  assets by banks representing loans under various categories of priority sector,  except the 'others' category, will be eligible for classification under  respective categories of priority sector (direct or indirect) provided:
(a)  The assets are originated by banks and financial institutions and are eligible  to be classified as priority sector advances prior to the purchase and fulfil  the Reserve Bank of India guidelines on outright purchase/assignment.
(b)  the eligible loan assets so purchased should not be disposed of other than by  way of repayment.
(c) the all inclusive interest charged to the ultimate  borrower by the originating entity should not exceed the Base Rate of the  purchasing bank plus 8 percent per annum.
The assignments/Outright purchases of eligible priority sector loans from MFIs, which  comply with the guidelines in Paragraph VIII of this circular are exempted from  this interest rate cap as there are separate caps on margin and interest rate.
(ii) When the banks undertake outright purchase of loan  assets from banks/ financial institutions to be classified under priority  sector, they must report the nominal amount actually disbursed to end priority  sector borrowers and not the premium embedded amount paid to the sellers.
(iii) Purchase/ assignment/investment  transactions undertaken by banks with NBFCs, where the underlying assets are  loans against gold jewellery, are not eligible for priority sector status.
VII. Inter Bank Participation Certificates  bought by Banks
Inter Bank Participation Certificates (IBPCs)  bought by banks, on a risk sharing basis, shall be eligible for classification  under respective categories of priority sector, provided the underlying assets  are eligible to be categorized under the respective categories of priority  sector and the banks fulfil the Reserve Bank guidelines on IBPCs.
VIII. Bank loans to MFIs for on-lending
(a)  Bank credit to MFIs extended on, or after, April 1, 2011 for on-lending  to individuals and also to members of SHGs / JLGs will be eligible for  categorisation as priority sector advance under respective categoriesviz.,  agriculture, micro and small enterprise, and 'others', as indirect finance,  provided not less than 85% of total assets of MFI (other than cash, balances  with banks and financial institutions, government securities and money market  instruments) are in the nature of “qualifying assets”. In addition, aggregate amount of loan,  extended for income generating activity, is not less than 70% of the total loans  given by MFIs.
(b) A “qualifying asset” shall mean a loan disbursed  by MFI, which satisfies the following criteria:
(i) The loan is  to be extended to a borrower whose household annual income in rural areas does  not exceed
`
60,000/-  while for non-rural areas it should not exceed
`
1,20,000/-.
(ii) Loan does not  exceed
`
35,000/-  in the first cycle and
`
50,000/-  in the subsequent cycles.
(iii) Total  indebtedness of the borrower does not exceed
`
50,000/-.
(iv) Tenure of loan is  not less than 24 months when loan amount exceeds
`
15,000/-  with right to borrower of prepayment without penalty.
(v) The loan is without  collateral.
(vi) Loan is repayable by weekly, fortnightly or  monthly installments at the choice of the borrower.
(c) Further, the banks have to ensure that MFIs  comply with the following caps on margin and interest rate as also other  ‘pricing guidelines’, to be eligible to classify these loans as priority sector  loans.
(i) Margin cap: With  effect from April 1, 2014, margin cap should not exceed 10 percent for MFIs  having loan portfolio exceeding
`
100 crore and 12  percent for others. The interest cost is to be calculated on average  fortnightly balances of outstanding borrowings and interest income is to be  calculated on average fortnightly balances of outstanding loan portfolio of  qualifying assets.
(ii) Interest cap on individual loans: With effect from April 1, 2014, interest rate  on individual loans will be the average Base Rate of five largest commercial  banks by assets multiplied by 2.75 per annum or cost of funds plus margin cap,  whichever is less. The average of the Base Rate shall be advised by Reserve  Bank of India.
(iii) Only three components are to be  included in pricing of loans viz., (a) a processing fee not exceeding 1% of the  gross loan amount, (b) the interest charge and (c) the insurance premium.
(iv) The processing fee  is not to be included in the margin cap or  the interest cap of 26%.
(v) Only the actual  cost of insurance i.e. actual cost of group insurance for life, health and  livestock for borrower and spouse can be recovered; administrative charges may  be recovered as per IRDA guidelines.
(vi) There should not be any penalty for delayed  payment.
(vii) No Security Deposit/ Margin are to be taken.
(d) The banks should obtain from MFI, at the end  of each quarter, a Chartered Accountant’s Certificate stating, inter-alia, that  (i) 85% of total assets of the MFI are in the nature of “qualifying assets’’,  (ii) the aggregate amount of loan, extended for income generation activity, is  not less than 70% of the total loans given by the MFIs, and (iii) pricing  guidelines are followed.
IX. Non-achievement of priority sector targets
All scheduled commercial banks having shortfall  in lending to priority sector target/sub shall be allocated amounts for  contribution to the Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) established  with NABARD and other Funds with NABARD/NHB/SIDBI/other Financial Institutions,  as decided by the Reserve Bank from time to time.
For the purpose of allocation of RIDF and other  Funds, as decided by Reserve Bank from time to time, the achievement levels of  priority sector lending as on the March 31st will be taken into  account. The deposits under the various Funds will be called upon by NABARD or  such other Financial Institutions as per the terms and conditions of the  scheme.
The interest rates on banks’ contribution to  RIDF or any other Funds, periods of deposits, etc. shall be fixed by Reserve  Bank of India from time to time and will be communicated  to the concerned banks every year by the Reserve Bank at the time of allocation  of funds.
The misclassifications reported by the Reserve  Bank’s Department of Banking Supervision would be adjusted/ reduced from the  achievement of that year, to which the amount of declassification/  misclassification pertains, for allocation to various funds in subsequent  years.
Non-achievement of priority sector targets and  sub-targets will be taken into account while granting regulatory  clearances/approvals for various purposes.
X. Priority Sector-Data Reporting System
The data on priority sector advances has to be  furnished by banks as per the extant guidelines on reporting.
XI. Common guidelines for priority sector loans
Banks should comply with the following common  guidelines for all categories of  advances under the priority sector.
1. Rate of interest
The rates of interest on various categories of  priority sector loans will be as per DBOD directives issued from time to time.
2. Service charges
No loan related and adhoc service  charges/inspection charges should be levied on priority sector loans up to
`
25,000.
3. Receipt, Sanction/Rejection/Disbursement  Register
A register/  electronic record should be maintained by the bank, wherein the date of  receipt, sanction/rejection/disbursement with reasons thereof, etc., should be  recorded. The register/electronic record should be made available to all  inspecting agencies.
4. Issue of Acknowledgement of Loan Applications
Banks should provide acknowledgement for loan  applications received under priority sector loans. Bank Boards should prescribe  a time limit within which the bank communicates its decision in writing to the  applicants.
XII. Amendments
These guidelines are subject to any instructions  that may be issued by the RBI from time to time.
XIII. Definitions
1.  On-lending: Loans sanctioned by banks to eligible intermediaries for onward  lending only for creation of priority sector assets. The average maturity of priority sector  assets thus created should be co-terminus with maturity of the bank loan.
2. Small and Marginal Farmers: Farmers with  landholding of up to 1 hectare is considered as Marginal Farmers. Farmers with  a landholding of more than 1 hectare but less than 2 hectares are considered as  Small Farmers. For the purpose of  priority sector loans ‘small and marginal farmers’ include landless  agricultural labourers, tenant farmers, oral lessees and share-croppers, whose  share of landholding is within above limits prescribed for “Small and Marginal  Farmer”.
XIV. Clarifications
(i) Contingent liabilities/off-balance sheet items do not form  part of priority sector target achievement. Banks should declassify such  accounts with retrospective effect, where a contingent liability/off-balance  sheet item is treated as a part of priority sector target achievement. However, foreign banks with less than 20  branches have an option to reckon the credit equivalent of  off-balance sheet items, extended to borrowers for eligible priority sector activities, along with priority sector  loans for the purpose of computation of priority sector  target achievement. In that case, the credit equivalent of all  off-balance sheet items (both priority sector and non-priority sector excluding interbank)should be added to the ANBC  in the denominator for computation PSL targets.
(ii) Off-balance sheet interbank exposures are  excluded for computing Credit Equivalent of Off -Balance Sheet Exposures for  the priority sector targets.
(iii) The term  “all inclusive interest” includes interest (effective annual interest),  processing fees and service charges.
(iv)  Banks should ensure that loans extended under priority sector are for approved  purposes and the end use is continuously monitored. The banks should put in  place proper internal controls and systems in this regard.
Appendix
Master Circular
Lending to Priority Sector
List of Circulars consolidated by the Master  Circular
S.No.
Circular No.
Date
Subject
Paragraph No.
1.
RBI/2013-14/591
RPCD.CO.Plan.    BC 101 /04.09.01/2013-14
May 15, 2014
Treatment of RIDF    and certain other funds under priority sector
II (iii), III    (1.2.3) (ix)
2.
RBI/2013-14/515
RPCD.CO.Plan.    BC 91 /04.09.01/ 2013-14
March 12, 2014
Priority Sector Lending-Targets and    Classification-Bank Loans to MFIs for on-lending- pricing criteria
VIII (c) (i),    VIII (c) (ii)
3.
DBOD Mailbox clarification
February 6, 2014
FCNR (B)/NRE Deposits- exemption from    ANBC
II (iii)
4.
RBI/2013-14/389
RPCD.MSME&NFS.BC.No.    61 /06.02.31/ 2013-14
December 2, 2013
Revised General Credit Card (GCC)    Scheme
III (2.1.4)
5.
RBI/2012-13/558
RPCD.CO.Plan.    BC 80 /04.09.01/ 2012-13
June 27, 2013
Priority Sector Lending-Targets and    Classification-Bank Loans to MFIs for on-lending-Amendment in income    generation criteria
VIII (a), VIII (d)
6.
RBI/2012-13/487
RPCD.CO.Plan.    BC 72 /04.09.01/ 2012-13
May 03, 2013
Priority Sector Lending-Targets and    Classification-Revision of Limits
III (1.1.1) (iv),    1.2.1 (ii), 1.2.3 (i), 2.1.2
7.
DBOD Mailbox clarification
April 18, 2013
Categorization of eligible Activities    under Priority Sector for Manufacturing Enterprises under MSMED Act, 2006
III 2.1 (2.1.1)
8.
RBI/2012-13/455
RPCD.CO.Plan.    BC 70 /04.09.01/ 2012-13
March 22, 2013
Priority Sector Lending-Treatment of    Contingent Liabilities-Clarifications
II (iii), XIV (i)
9.
RBI/2012-13/354
RPCD.MSME    & NFS. BC.No.54/06.02.31/ 2012-13
December 31, 2012
Revision in existing investment limits    in plant & machinery/equipment for lending to Micro Enterprises in the    40:20 proportion
II (i)
10.
RBI/2012-13/253
RPCD.    CO. Plan. BC 37 /04.09.01/ 2012-13
October 17, 2012
Priority Sector Lending – Targets and    Classification
III 1.1.2, III    1.2.1 (i), III 2.1.2, III 4 (iii), (iv), (v), XIV (ii), (iii), (iv)
11.
RBI/2012-13/138
RPCD.    CO. Plan. BC 13/04.09.01/ 2012-13
July 20, 2012
Priority Sector Lending – Targets and    Classification
I, II, III, IV,    V, VI, VII, VIII, IX, XI, XII, XIII