(322 kb)
Master Circular on Establishment of Liaison / Branch /Project Offices in India by Foreign Entities
RBI/2014-2015/11
Master Circular No.7/2014-15
July 01, 2014
To,
All Category – I  Authorised Dealer banks
Madam / Sir,
Master Circular on Establishment of  Liaison / Branch /
Project Offices in India by Foreign Entities
Establishment of Branch/Liaison/Project  Offices in India  is regulated in terms of Section 6(6) of Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999  read with
Notification No.FEMA 22/2000-RB  dated May 3, 2000
as amended from time to time.
2. This  Master Circular consolidates the existing instructions on the subject of  “Establishment of Branch/Liaison/Project Offices in India by Foreign Entities" at  one place. The list of underlying circulars/notifications consolidated in this  Master Circular is furnished in the Appendix.
3. This
Master Circular
is being updated from time to  time as and when the fresh instructions are issued. The date up to which the  Master Circular has been updated is suitably indicated.
4. This Master Circular may be referred to for  general guidance. The Authorised Persons and the Authorised Dealer Category – I  banks may refer to respective circulars/ notifications for detailed  information, if so needed.
Yours faithfully,
(C D Srinivasan)
Chief General Manager
INDEX
(A)
General Criteria – Liaison Office / Branch Office
(B)
Liaison Office
(C)
Branch Offices
(D)
Application for Undertaking Additional Activities or Additional Branch / Liaison Offices
(E)
Reporting by Branch/Liaison Offices
(F)
Closure of Branch/Liaison Offices
(G)
Project Office
(H)
Other General Conditions Applicable to Branch / Liaison/ Project Offices of Foreign Entities in India
Annex 1
FNC
Annex 2
Format of the Letter of  Comfort
Annex 3
Format of report to  DG of Police
Annex 4
Annual Activity Certificate
Appendix
List of  Notifications/Circulars consolidated in this Master Circular
Establishment  of Branch/Liaison/Project Offices in India by Foreign Entities
(A)  GENERAL CRITERIA – LIAISON OFFICE / BRANCH OFFICE
A body corporate  incorporated outside India  (including a firm or other association of individuals), desirous of opening a  Liaison Office (LO) / Branch Office (BO) in India have to obtain permission  from the Reserve Bank under provisions of FEMA 1999. The applications from such  entities in Form FNC (Annex-1) will be considered by Reserve Bank under two  routes:
Reserve  Bank Route
— Where principal business of the  foreign entity falls under sectors where 100 per cent Foreign Direct  Investment (FDI) is permissible under the automatic route.
Government  Route
— Where principal business of the  foreign entity falls under the sectors where 100 per cent FDI is not  permissible under the automatic route. Applications from entities falling under  this category and those from Non - Government Organisations / Non - Profit  Organisations / Government Bodies / Departments are considered by the Reserve  Bank in consultation with the Ministry of Finance, Government of India.
The following additional criteria are also  considered by the Reserve Bank while sanctioning Liaison/Branch Offices of  foreign entities:
Track  Record
For Branch Office — a  profit making track record during the immediately preceding five financial  years in the home country.
For Liaison Office —  a profit making track record during the immediately preceding three financial  years in the home country.
• Net Worth [total of paid-up  capital and free reserves, less intangible assets as per the latest Audited  Balance Sheet or Account Statement certified by a Certified Public Accountant  or any Registered Accounts Practitioner by whatever name].
o  For Branch Office — not less  than USD 100,000 or its equivalent.
o  For Liaison Office — not less  than USD 50,000 or its equivalent.
The  application for establishing BO / LO in India should be forwarded by the  foreign entity through a designated AD Category - I bank to the Chief General  Manager-in-Charge, Reserve Bank of India, Foreign Exchange Department, Foreign  Investment Division, Central Office, Fort, Mumbai-400 001, along with the  prescribed documents including
• English version of the  Certificate of Incorporation / Registration or Memorandum & Articles of  Association attested by Indian Embassy / Notary Public in the Country of  Registration.
• Latest Audited Balance Sheet of the applicant  entity.
Applicants who do not  satisfy the eligibility criteria and are subsidiaries of other companies can  submit a Letter of Comfort from their parent company as per Annex -2, subject  to the condition that the parent company satisfies the eligibility criteria as prescribed  above. The designated AD Category - I bank should exercise due diligence in  respect of the applicant’s background, antecedents of the promoter, nature and  location of activity, sources of funds, etc. and also ensure compliance with  the KYC norms before forwarding the application together with their comments/  recommendations to the Reserve Bank.
The Branch / Liaison offices established with  the Reserve Bank's approval will be allotted a Unique Identification Number  (UIN) (
www.rbi.org.in/scripts/Fema.aspx
)
.  The BOs / LOs shall also obtain Permanent Account Number (PAN) from the Income  Tax Authorities on setting up the offices in India.
(B) LIAISON  OFFICE
b.1  Permissible Activities for a Liaison Office
A Liaison Office  (also known as Representative Office) can undertake only liaison activities,  i.e. it can act as a channel of communication between Head Office abroad and  parties in India.  It is not allowed to undertake any business activity in India and cannot earn any income in India. Expenses  of such offices are to be met entirely through inward remittances of foreign  exchange from the Head Office outside India. The role of such offices is,  therefore, limited to collecting information about possible market  opportunities and providing information about the company and its products to  the prospective Indian customers. Permission to set up such offices is  initially granted for a period of 3 years and this may be extended from time to  time by an AD Category I bank.
A Liaison Office can  undertake the following activities in India:
Representing  in India  the parent company / group companies.
Promoting  export / import from / to India.
Promoting  technical/financial collaborations between parent/group companies and companies  in India.
Acting  as a communication channel between the parent company and Indian companies.
b.2. Liaison Office  of Foreign Insurance Companies / Banks
Foreign Insurance  companies can establish Liaison Offices in India only after obtaining approval  from the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA).
Foreign banks can  establish Liaison Offices in India  only after obtaining approval from the Department of Banking Operations and  Development (DBOD), RBI.
b.3 Extension of Validity  of the Approval of Liaison Offices
The designated AD  Category - I bank may extend the validity period of LO/s for a period of 3  years from the date of expiry of the original approval / extension granted by  the Reserve Bank, if the applicant has complied with the following conditions  and the application is otherwise in order.
The  LO should have submitted the Annual Activity Certificates for the previous  years and
The  account of the LO maintained with the designated AD Category – I bank is being  operated in accordance with the terms and conditions stipulated in the  approval.
Such extension has to  be granted, as expeditiously as possible, within a period of one month from the  receipt of the request under intimation to the Regional Office concerned of the  Reserve Bank and to the Chief General Manager–in-Charge, Foreign Exchange  Department, Reserve Bank of India, Central Office, Mumbai, 400 001, quoting the  reference number of the original approval letter and the UIN.
The application for extension of the validity  period of the LOs of banks and entities engaged in insurance business has to be  directly submitted to the Department of Banking Operations and Development,  Reserve Bank and Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA),  respectively as stipulated by them, as hitherto. Further, no extension would be  considered for LOs of entities which are NBFCs and those engaged in  construction and development sectors (excluding infrastructure development  companies). Upon expiry of the validity period, these entities have to either  close down or be converted into a Joint Venture (JV) / Wholly Owned Subsidiary  (WOS), in conformity with the extant Foreign Direct Investment policy.
(C) BRANCH OFFICES
c.1 Permissible  Activities
a). Companies  incorporated outside India  and engaged in manufacturing or trading activities are allowed to set up Branch  Offices in India  with specific approval of the Reserve Bank. Such Branch Offices are permitted  to represent the parent / group companies and undertake the following activities  in India:
1
Export  / Import of goods.
Rendering professional or consultancy  services.
Carrying out research work, in areas in  which the parent company is engaged.
Promoting technical or financial  collaborations between Indian companies and parent or overseas group company.
Representing the parent company in India and acting as buying / selling agent in India.
Rendering services in information  technology and development of software in India.
Rendering technical support  to the products supplied by parent/group companies.
Foreign  airline / shipping company.
Normally, the Branch  Office should be engaged in the activity in which the parent company is  engaged.
b) Retail trading activities of any nature is not  allowed for a Branch Office in India.
c) A  Branch Office is not allowed to carry out manufacturing or processing  activities in India,  directly or indirectly.
d) Profits  earned by the Branch Offices are freely remittable from India, subject  to payment of applicable taxes.
c.2 Branch Office in  Special Economic Zones (SEZs)
(i) Reserve Bank has  given general permission to foreign companies for establishing branch/unit in  Special Economic Zones (SEZs) to undertake manufacturing and service  activities. The general permission is subject to the following conditions:
such  units are functioning in those sectors where 100 per cent FDI is permitted;
such  units comply with part XI of the Companies Act,1956 (Section 592 to 602);
such  units function on a stand-alone basis.
(ii) In the event of  winding-up of business and for remittance of winding-up proceeds, the branch  shall approach an AD Category – I bank with the documents as mentioned under  "Closure of Liaison / Branch Office" except the copy of the letter  granting approval by the Reserve Bank.
c.3 Branches of  Foreign Banks
Foreign banks do not  require separate approval under FEMA, for opening branch office in India. Such  banks are, however, required to obtain necessary approval under the provisions  of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, from Department of Banking Operations  & Development, Reserve Bank.
(D) Application  for Undertaking Additional Activities or Additional Branch / Liaison Offices
Requests for  undertaking activities in addition to what has been permitted initially by the  Reserve Bank may be submitted through the designated AD Category -I bank to the  Chief General Manager-in-Charge, Reserve Bank of India, Foreign Exchange  Department, Foreign Investment Division, Central Office, Mumbai, justifying the  need with comments of the designated AD Category - I bank.
Requests for  establishing additional BO / LOs may be submitted through fresh FNC form (Annex  1), duly signed by the authorized signatory of the foreign entity in the home  country to the Reserve Bank of India as explained above. However, the documents  mentioned in form FNC need not be resubmitted, if there are no changes to the  documents already submitted earlier.
If  the number of Offices exceeds 4 (i.e. one BO / LO in each zone viz; East, West,  North and South), the applicant has to justify the need for additional  office/s.
The  applicant may identify one of its Offices in India  as the Nodal Office, which will coordinate the activities of all Offices in India.
(E) Reporting  by Branch/Liaison Offices
e.1.  All new entities setting up LO/BO shall submit a report containing information,  as per format provided in Annex 3 within five working days of the LO/BO  becoming functional to the Director General of Police (DGP) of the state  concerned in which LO/BO has established its office; if there is more than one  office of such a foreign entity, in such cases to each of the DGP concerned of  the state where it has established office in India; [ as amended vide
AP (DIR) No.35 dated September 25, 2012
]
e.2. Branch Offices / Liaison Offices have to file  Annual Activity Certificates (AAC) (Annex 4) from Chartered Accountants, at the  end of March 31, along with the audited Balance Sheet on or before September 30  of that year. In case the annual accounts of the LO/ BO are finalized with  reference to a date other than March 31, the AAC along with the audited Balance  Sheet may be submitted within six months from the due date of the Balance Sheet  to the designated AD Category I bank, and a copy to the Directorate General of  Income Tax (International Taxation), New Delhi along with the audited financial  statements including receipt and payment account. [
as amended vide AP (DIR) No.55 dated November 26, 2012
]
The  certificates are to be filed by the following offices as applicable:
In  case of a sole BO/LO, by the BO/LO concerned;
In  case of multiple BO/LO, a combined Annual Activity Certificate in respect of  all Offices in India  by the Nodal Office of the BO/LOs.
The designated AD Category - I bank shall  scrutinize the Annual Activity Certificate and ensure that the activities  undertaken by the BO/LO are being carried out in accordance with the terms and  conditions of the approval given by the Reserve Bank. In the event of any  adverse findings being reported by the Auditor or noticed by the designated AD  Category -I bank, the same should be reported immediately by the designated AD  Category–I bank to the respective Regional Office of the Reserve Bank in  respect of LOs and to the Central Office of the Reserve Bank in the case of  BOs, along with the copy of the Annual Activity Certificate and their comments  thereon.
e.3.  A copy of the report in Annex 3 shall be filed with the DGP concerned on annual  basis along with a copy of the Annual Activity Certificate, and also with the  AD concerned. [As amended vide
AP (DIR) No.35 dated September 25, 2012
]
F) Closure of  Branch/Liaison Offices
At the time of  winding up of Branch/Liaison offices the company has to approach the designated  AD Category - I bank with the following documents:
Copy  of the Reserve Bank's permission/ approval from the sectoral regulator(s) for  establishing the BO / LO.
Auditor’s  certificate- i) indicating the manner in which the remittable amount has been  arrived at and supported by a statement of assets and liabilities of the  applicant, and indicating the manner of disposal of assets; ii) confirming that  all liabilities in India including arrears of gratuity and other benefits to  employees, etc., of the Office have been either fully met or adequately  provided for; and iii) confirming that no income accruing from sources outside  India (including proceeds of exports) has remained un-repatriated to India.
No-objection  / Tax Clearance Certificate from Income-Tax authority for the remittance/s.
Confirmation  from the applicant/parent company that no legal proceedings in any Court in India are  pending and there is no legal impediment to the remittance.
A  report from the Registrar of Companies regarding compliance with the provisions  of the Companies Act, 1956, in case of winding up of the Office in India.
Any  other document/s, specified by the Reserve Bank while granting approval. The  designated AD Category - I banks has to ensure that the BO / LOs had filed  their respective Annual Activity Certificates with the Reserve Bank for the  previous years, in respect of the existing Branch/Liaison Offices. Confirmation  about the same can be obtained from the Central Office of the Reserve Bank in  the case of BOs and from the Regional Office concerned in the case of LOs.
Closure of such BO / LO has to be reported by the  designated AD Category - I bank to the Reserve Bank (the Regional Office  concerned for LOs and Central Office for BOs), along with a declaration stating  that all the necessary documents submitted by the BO / LO have been scrutinized  and found to be in order. If the documents are not found in order or cases are  not covered under delegated powers, the AD Category - I bank may forward the  application to the Reserve Bank, with their observations, for necessary action.  All the documents relating to the BO / LO operations may be retained by the AD  Category - I bank for verification by the internal auditors of the AD /  inspecting officers of the Reserve Bank.
(G) PROJECT OFFICE
g.1 General  Permission
Reserve Bank has  granted general permission to foreign companies to establish Project Offices in  India, provided they have secured a contract from an Indian company to execute  a project in India, and
the project is funded directly by       inward remittance from abroad; or
the project is funded by a       bilateral or multilateral International Financing Agency; or
the project has been cleared by an       appropriate authority; or
a company or entity in India awarding the contract has been       granted Term Loan by a Public Financial Institution or a bank in India for       the project. However, if the above criteria are not met, the foreign       entity has to approach the Reserve Bank of India, Central Office, for       approval.
Setting up of Project Offices by foreign  Non-Government Organisations/Non-Profit Organisations/Foreign Government  Bodies/Departments, by whatever name called, are under the Government Route. Accordingly, such  entities are required to apply to the Reserve Bank for prior permission to  establish an office in India,  whether Project Office or otherwise. [as amended vide
AP (DIR) No.31 dated September 17, 2012
]
g.2 Opening of Foreign Currency  Account
AD Category – I banks can open  non-interest bearing Foreign Currency Account for Project Offices in India  subject to the following:
The Project Office has been established in India,  with the general / specific permission of Reserve Bank, having the requisite  approval from the concerned Project Sanctioning Authority concerned.
The  contract, under which the project has been sanctioned, specifically provides  for payment in foreign currency.
Each  Project Office can open two Foreign Currency Accounts, usually one denominated  in USD and other in home currency, provided both are maintained with the same  AD category–I bank.
The  permissible debits to the account shall be payment of project related expenditure  and credits shall be foreign currency receipts from the Project Sanctioning  Authority, and remittances from parent/group company abroad or bilateral /  multilateral international financing agency.
The  responsibility of ensuring that only the approved debits and credits are  allowed in the Foreign Currency Account shall rest solely with the branch  concerned of the AD. Further, the Accounts shall be subject to 100 per cent  scrutiny by the Concurrent Auditor of the respective AD banks.
The  Foreign Currency accounts have to be closed at the completion of the Project.
g.3 Intermittent Remittances by  Project Offices in India
(i) AD  Category – I bank can permit intermittent remittances by Project Offices  pending winding up / completion of the project provided they are satisfied with  the bonafides of the transaction, subject to the following:
The  Project   Office  submits  an   Auditors'  /  Chartered   Accountants’ Certificate to the effect that sufficient provisions have  been made to meet the liabilities in India including Income Tax, etc.
An  undertaking from the Project Office that the remittance will not, in any way,  affect the completion of the Project in India and that any shortfall of funds  for meeting any liability in India will be met by inward remittance from  abroad.
(ii) Inter-Project  transfer of funds requires prior permission of the Regional Office concerned of  the Reserve Bank under whose jurisdiction the Project Office is situated.
g.4 Reporting requirements
(i) All new entities setting up  Project Offices shall submit a report containing information, as per format  provided in Annex 3 within five working days of the PO becoming functional to  the Director General of Police (DGP) of the state concerned in which PO has  established its office; if there is more than one office of such a foreign  entity, in such cases to each of the DGP concerned of the state where it has  established office in India; [as amended vide
AP(DIR) No.35 dated  September 25, 2012
]
(ii) The foreign company  establishing a Project Office in India  is to furnish report through the concerned AD branch, to the concerned Regional  Office of Reserve Bank of India  under whose jurisdiction the Project Office is set up, incorporating the  following details.
Name and address of the Foreign Company,
Reference Number and date of letter awarding the       contract referred to in clause (ii) of Regulation 5 of
Notification No. FEMA 22/2000-RB dated May 3, 2000
,
Particulars of the authority awarding the projects       / contract,
The total amount of contract,
Address / e-mail address / telephone number / fax       number of the Project Office,
Tenure of Project Office,
Brief details of the Project undertaken,
AD branch with whom the account has been opened       and the foreign currency in which the account is opened,
An undertaking to the effect that the Project       Office is eligible to avail of the General Permission under Regulation       5(ii) to RBI
Notification No.22/2000 – RB dated May       3, 2000
read with
Notification No. FEMA 95 dated July 2, 2003
showing the reason thereof.
This Report shall be forwarded  through the AD branch to the Regional Office concerned of the Reserve Bank of India  within 2 months of establishment of the Project Office.
(iii) The  Project Office shall also submit to the AD branch on an
annual basis,
a  Certificate from a Chartered Accountant showing the Project Status and  certifying that the accounts of the Project Office has been audited and the  activities undertaken are in conformity with the General / Specific permission  given by the Reserve Bank.
Additional Reporting Requirements:
A copy  of the report in Annex 3 shall be filed with the DGP concerned on annual  basis along with a copy of the annual certificate, and also with the AD  concerned. [as amended vide
AP (DIR) No.35  dated September 25,  2012
]
(H) Other  General Conditions Applicable to Branch / Liaison / Project Offices of Foreign  Entities in India
(i) Without  prior permission of the Reserve Bank, no person being a citizen of / registered  in Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri   Lanka, Afghanistan,  Iran, China,
2
Hong  Kong or Macau can establish in India,  a Branch or a Liaison Office or a Project Office or any other place of  business.
(ii) Entities from Nepal  are allowed to establish only Liaison Offices in India.
(iii) Branch/Project  Offices of a foreign entity are permitted to acquire immovable property by way  of purchase for their own use and to carry out permitted/incidental activities.  However, entities from Pakistan,  Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Afghanistan,  Iran, Bhutan or China  are not allowed to acquire immovable property in India for a Branch / Project Office  without prior RBI approval.
All Branch / Project Offices  including Liaison Offices, have general permission to carry out permitted /  incidental activities from lease property subject to lease period not exceeding  five years.
(iv) Branch / Liaison / Project Offices are  allowed to open non-interest bearing INR current accounts in India. Such Offices are required to  approach their Authorised Dealers for opening the accounts.
(v)
3
Powers  relating to transfer of assets of Liaison / Branch Office/Project Office have  been delegated to AD Category-1 Banks subject to compliance with the following  stipulations:
Such  proposals will be considered only from LO/BOs who are adhering to the  operational guidelines stipulated in
AP DIR Circular No.23
&
24
of December 30, 2009 such as (i)  submission of AACs (up to the current financial year) at regular annual  intervals with copies endorsed to DGIT (International Taxation) and (ii)  obtained PAN from IT Authorities and have got registered with ROC under  Companies Act 1956, if necessary. Similarly, proposals from POs should conform  to the guidelines issued in
AP DIR Cir.No.44 dated May 17, 2005
with  regard to initial reporting requirements (para.2.3) and submission of CA  certified annual report indicating project status (para.2.4).
A  certificate is to be submitted from the Statutory Auditor furnishing details of  assets to be transferred indicating their date of acquisition, original price,  depreciation till date, present book value or WDV value and sale consideration  to be obtained. Statutory Auditor should also confirm that the assets were not  re-valued after their initial acquisition. The sale consideration should not be  more than the book value in each case.
The  assets should have been acquired by the LO/BO/PO from inward remittances and no  intangible assets such as good will, pre-operative expenses should be included.  No revenue expenses such as lease hold improvements incurred by LO/BOs can be  capitalised and transferred to JV/WOS.
AD bank  to ensure payment of all applicable taxes while permitting transfer of assets.
Transfer  of assets to be allowed by AD banks only when the foreign entity intends to  close their LO/BO/PO operations in India.
Credits to the bank accounts of LO/BO/PO on account  of such transfer of assets will be treated as permissible credits.
(vi) Branch Offices are  permitted to remit outside India  profit of the branch net of applicable Indian taxes, on production of the  following documents to the satisfaction of the Authorised Dealer through whom  the remittance is effected
a. A Certified copy of the  audited Balance Sheet and Profit and Loss account for the relevant year
b. A Chartered Accountant’s  certificate certifying
the manner of arriving at the remittable  profit
that the entire remittable profit has been  earned by undertaking the permitted activities
that the profit does not include any profit on  revaluation of the assets of the branch.
(vii) Authorised Dealers can  allow term deposit account for a period not exceeding 6 months in favor of a  branch/office of a person resident outside India provided the bank is satisfied  that the term deposit is out of temporary surplus funds and the branch / office  furnishes an undertaking that the maturity proceeds of the term deposit will be  utilised for their business in India within 3 months of maturity. However, such  facility may not be extended to shipping/airline companies.
(viii) Regularisation of LO / BO established during pre-FEMA period
Under the provisions of FEMA 1999 foreign entities  are permitted to establish a branch or liaison office in India with permission of the Reserve Bank of India.  Liaison / Branch Offices established in pre FEMA period without approval of  Reserve Bank of India and those that have not been allotted a Unique  Identification Number by the Reserve Bank of India may approach the Reserve  Bank through their ADs to regularise the offices under FEMA 1999.
Appendix
LIST OF  NOTIFICATIONS/CIRCULARS CONSOLIDATED IN THIS MASTER
CIRCULAR
http://www.rbi.org.in/scripts/Fema.aspx
Sr. No.
Notification    / Circular No.
Date
1
Notification no. FEMA 22/2000-RB
May 03, 2000
2
Notification No FEMA 13/2000-RB
May 03, 2000
3
Notification No FEMA 21/2000-RB
May 03, 2000
4
Notification no. FEMA 95/2003-RB
July 02, 2003
5
Notification no. FEMA 102/2003-RB
Oct. 03, 2003
6
Notification no. FEMA 134/2005-RB
May 07, 2005
7
Notification no. FEMA 161/2005-RB
Sept 18,2007
8
Notification no. FEMA 198/2009-RB
Sept. 24, 2009
9
Notification no. FEMA 204/2009-RB
April 05, 2010
10
A.P. (DIR series) Circular No. 3
July 06,2002
11
A.P. (DIR series) Circular No. 37
Nov. 15, 2003
12
A.P. (DIR series) Circular No. 58
Jan. 16, 2004
13
A.P. (DIR series) Circular No. 39
April 25, 2005
14
A.P. (DIR series) Circular No. 44
May 17, 2005
15
A.P. (DIR series) Circular No. 02
July 31, 2008
16
A.P. (DIR series) Circular No. 23
December 30, 2009
17
A.P. (DIR series) Circular No. 24
December 30, 2009
18.
A.P. (DIR series) Circular No. 06
August 09, 2010
19
A.P. (DIR series) Circular No. 02
July 15, 2011
20
A.P. (DIR series) Circular No. 76
February 9, 2012
21.
A.P. (DIR series) Circular No. 88
March 1, 2012
22.
A.P. (DIR series) Circular No. 31
September 17, 2012
23.
A.P.(DIR series) Circular No. 35
September 25, 2012
24.
A.P. (DIR series) Circular No. 55
November 26, 2012
25.
A.P.    (DIR series) Circular No. 93
January 15, 2014
26.
A.P. (DIR series) Circular No. 142
June 12, 2014
Note: It is clarified  for the information of all users that the Master Circular need not necessarily  be exhaustive and a reference to the relevant A.P. (DIR Series) Circular is  needed, wherever further information/clarification is required.
1
Procurement  of goods for export and sale of goods after import are allowed only on  wholesale basis
2
A.P.(Dir Series) circular No. 93 dated January 15, 2014
3
A.P.(Dir Series) circular No. 142 dated June 12, 2014