(287 kb)
Master Circular on Interest Rates on Rupee Deposits held in Domestic, Ordinary Non-Resident (NRO) and Non-Resident (External) (NRE) Accounts
RBI/2014-15/63
DBOD.No.Dir.BC.15/13.03.00/2014-15
July 1, 2014
Ashadha 10, 1936 (Saka)
All  Scheduled Commercial Banks
(excluding RRBs)
Dear Sir / Madam
Master Circular on Interest Rates on Rupee Deposits  held in Domestic, Ordinary Non-Resident (NRO) and Non-Resident (External) (NRE)  Accounts
Please  refer to the
Master Circular DBOD No. Dir. BC. 10 /13.03.00/2013-14 dated July 1,  2013
consolidating the instructions / guidelines issued to banks till June 30,  2013 relating to Interest Rates on Rupee Deposits held in Domestic, Ordinary  Non-Resident (NRO) and Non-Resident (External) (NRE) Accounts. The
Master  Circular
has been suitably updated by incorporating the instructions issued up  to June 30, 2014 and has been placed on the RBI website (
http://www.rbi.org.in
).  A  copy of the Master Circular is enclosed.
Yours faithfully
(Lily Vadera)
Chief General Manager
Encl : as above
CONTENTS
Para.
          No.
Particulars
A
Purpose
B
Classification
C
Previous instructions
D
Application
1
Introduction
1.1
Domestic Deposits
1.2
Ordinary Non-Resident (NRO) Accounts
1.3
Non-Resident (External) (NRE) Accounts
1.4
Interest Rate Regulation on NRE and NRO Deposits
2
Guidelines
2.1
Definitions
2.2
Minimum    tenor and rates of interest payable
on Savings deposits and    on Term deposits
2.3
Payment of interest on    fixed deposit -
Method    of calculation of interest
2.4
Additional interest to Army Group Insurance    Directorate, etc.
2.5
Discretion to pay additional interest not    exceeding one percent on deposits of bank’s staff and their exclusive    associations
2.6
Discretion to pay    additional interest not exceeding
one    per cent on deposits of Chairman and
Managing    Director and Executive Directors of the bank
2.7
Discretion to pay interest on current accounts    maintained
by Regional Rural Banks with sponsor banks
2.8
Discretion    to pay interest on the minimum credit balance
in the    composite cash credit account of a farmer
2.9
Deposit    Scheme for Senior Citizens
2.10
Premature    withdrawal of term deposit
2.11
Conversion    of a term deposit, a deposit in the form of daily
deposit    or a recurring deposit for reinvestment in term deposit
2.12
Renewal of Overdue deposits
2.13
Advance    against term deposit - Manner of charging interest
2.14
Margin on advance against term deposit
2.15
Restrictions    on advances against NR(E)RA Deposits -
Quantum    of loans
2.16
Interest    payable on the deposit account of deceased depositor
2.17
Notifying RBI regarding change in    interest on deposits and also the break-up of deposits according to different    interest rate ranges
2.18
Addition or deletion of the name/s of joint account    holders
2.18A
Resident Bank Account Maintained by Residents in India- Joint    holder- Liberalisation
2.19
Rounding    off of transactions
2.20
Issue    of term deposit receipt
2.21
Payment    of interest on term deposit maturing
on    Sunday/holiday/non-business working day
2.22A
Deposit    Mobilisation Schemes
2.22B
Special Term Deposit Products with Lock-in Period
2.23A
Minimum balance in Savings Bank Accounts
2.23B
Minimum Balance in In-operative Accounts
2.24
Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account (BSBDA)
2.25
Exemptions
2.26
Prohibitions
Annex 1
Rates of Interest on domestic deposits
Annex 2
Interest    Rates on NRE deposits
Annex 3
Exemptions from prohibitions under para 2.26(n)(i)
Appendix
List of    circulars consolidated
Master Circular on Interest Rates on Rupee  Deposits held in Domestic, Ordinary Non-Resident (NRO) and Non-Resident  (External) (NRE) Accounts
A.
Purpose
To consolidate the directives on interest rates  on Rupee Deposits held in Domestic, Ordinary Non-Resident (NRO) and  Non-Resident (External) (NRE) Accounts issued by Reserve Bank of India from  time to time.
B.
Classification
A statutory guideline issued by the Reserve Bank  in exercise of the powers conferred by the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
C.
Previous  instructions
This Master Circular consolidates and updates  the instructions on the above subject contained in the circulars listed in
APPENDIX
.
D.
Application
To all Scheduled Commercial Banks, excluding  Regional Rural Banks.
Structure
1. INTRODUCTION
2. GUIDELINES
2.1
Definitions
2.2
Minimum    tenor and rates of interest payable on Savings deposits and Term deposits
2.3
Payment of    interest on fixed deposit - Method of calculation of interest
2.4
Additional    interest to AGID, NGIF and AFGIS
2.5
Discretion    to pay additional interest not exceeding one percent on deposits of bank’s    staff and their exclusive associations
2.6
Discretion    to pay additional interest on deposits of Chairman and Managing Director and    Executive Directors of the bank
2.7
Discretion    to pay interest on current account maintained by RRBs with sponsor bank
2.8
Discretion    to pay interest on the minimum credit balance in the composite cash credit    account of a farmer
2.9
Deposit    Scheme for Senior Citizens
2.10
Premature    withdrawal of term deposit
2.11
Conversion    of term deposit, deposit in the form of daily deposit or recurring deposit    for reinvestment in term deposit
2.12
Renewal of    Overdue deposits
2.13
Advance    against term deposit – Manner of charging interest
2.14
Margin on    advance against term deposit
2.15
Restrictions on advances against NR(E)RA Deposits - Quantum    of Loans
2.16
Interest    payable on the deposit account of a deceased depositor
2.17
Notifying    RBI regarding change in interest on deposits and also the break-up of    deposits according to different interest rate ranges
2.18
Addition or    deletion of the name/s of joint account holders
2.18A
Resident Bank Account Maintained by Residents in    India- Joint holder- Liberalisation
2.19
Rounding    off of transactions
2.20
Issue of    term deposit receipt
2.21
Payment of    interest on term deposit maturing on Sunday/ holiday/non-business working day
2.22.A
Deposit    Mobilisation Schemes
2.22.B
Special Term Deposit Products with Lock-in Period
2.23 A
Minimum    balance in Savings Bank Accounts
2.23 B
Minimum    balance in In-operative Accounts
2.24
Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account (BSBDA)
2.25
Exemptions
2.26
Prohibitions
Annex 1
Rates of    Interest on domestic deposits
Annex 2
Interest    Rates on NRE deposits
Annex 3
Exemptions    from prohibitions under para 2.26(n)(i)
Appendix
List of    circulars consolidated
1.
INTRODUCTION
1.1
Domestic Deposits
Prior to reforms, RBI prescribed the deposit rates and the maturities on deposits that  could be offered by banks. There was no price competition among suppliers of  banking services and the customer had only limited products to choose from. As  a result of deregulation, banks are free to fix their own deposit rates which imply choices for the depositor.  Also, a customer can earn interest on a term deposit  for a minimum period of 7 days. Banks are now also free to offer varying rates of interest for different sizes of deposits  above a cut-off point, since the cost of transaction differs by size. Earlier, RBI  decided the penalty structure for premature withdrawal of deposits, but this  has now been left to each bank.
With effect from October 22, 1997, RBI has given  the freedom to commercial banks to fix their own interest rates on domestic  term deposits of various maturities with the prior approval of their respective  Board of Directors/Asset Liability Management Committee (ALCO). The interest  rate on savings bank accounts too, has been deregulated with effect from October  25, 2011, subject to the conditions mentioned at paragraph 2.2B (iii).
A domestic rupee account may be opened as  current, savings or term deposit.
1.2
Ordinary  Non-Resident (NRO) Accounts
NRIs can open  Non-Resident Ordinary (NRO) deposit accounts for collecting their funds from  local bonafide transactions. NRO accounts being Rupee accounts, the exchange  rate risk on such deposits is borne by the depositors themselves. When a  resident becomes an NRI, his existing Rupee accounts are designated as NRO.  Such accounts also serve the requirements of foreign nationals resident in  India. AD Category-I banks may permit foreign nationals who have come to India  on employment and are eligible to open/hold a resident savings bank account to  re-designate their resident account maintained in India as NRO account on  leaving the country after their employment to enable them to receive their legitimate  dues subject to certain conditions.
NRIs can open  Non-Resident Ordinary (NRO) deposit accounts for collecting their funds from  local bonafide transactions. NRO accounts being Rupee accounts, the exchange  rate risk on such deposits is borne by the depositors themselves. When a  resident becomes an NRI, his existing Rupee accounts are designated as NRO.  Such accounts also serve the requirements of foreign nationals resident in  India. AD Category-I banks may permit foreign nationals who have come to India  on employment and are eligible to open/hold a resident savings bank account to  re-designate their resident account maintained in India as NRO account on  leaving the country after their employment to enable them to receive their legitimate  dues subject to certain conditions.
1.3
Non-Resident  (External) (NRE) Accounts
The Non-Resident (External) Rupee Account NR(E)RA  scheme, also known as the NRE scheme, was introduced in 1970. Any NRI can open  an NRE account with funds remitted to India through a bank abroad. This is a  repatriable account and transfer from another NRE account or FCNR(B) account is  also permitted. An NRE rupee account may be opened as current, savings or term  deposit. Local payments can be freely made from NRE accounts. Since this  account is maintained in Rupees, the depositor is exposed to exchange risk.  NRIs / PIOs have the option to credit the current income to their Non-Resident  (External) Rupee accounts, provided the authorised dealer is satisfied that the  credit represents current income of the non-resident account holders and  income-tax thereon has been deducted / provided for.
1.4
Interest Rate Regulation on NRE and NRO Deposits
Prior  to 1990s, in line with the regulation of domestic deposit rates, interest rates  on various NRI deposit schemes were regulated. As a first step towards  flexibility, the detailed maturity-wise prescriptions were rationalized in 1992  for NRE deposits, in line with the flexibility provided for domestic deposits. With a view to aligning the maturity structure  of NRE and domestic deposits, interest rates on NRE term deposits of maturity  over 2 years were freed effective April 4, 1996 while those for maturity over 1  year were freed effective April 16, 1997. Effective September 13, 1997, banks  were given complete freedom to decide interest rates across all maturities.
In  response to changing conditions in the financial markets, interest rates on NRE  term deposits were linked to the international rates by way of a ceiling of 250  basis points over and above the US Dollar LIBOR/Swap rates of corresponding  maturities, effective July 17, 2003. The ceiling rates were progressively  reduced and brought down to LIBOR/SWAP rates for corresponding maturities with  effect from close of business as on April 24, 2007. The year 2008-09, however, saw a progressive  increase in the ceiling rates to 175 basis points over and above LIBOR/Swap  rates for corresponding maturities with effect from the close of business as on  November 15, 2008. Alongside, the NRE  savings deposits rate was delinked from the domestic savings deposits rate and  the ceiling NRE savings deposits rate was fixed at 6-month US Dollar LIBOR/Swap  rate effective April 17, 2004. However, with effect from the close of business  in India on November 17, 2005, the interest rates on NRE saving deposits are  the same as applicable to domestic savings deposits.
With  a view to providing greater flexibility to banks in mobilising non-resident  deposits and also in view of the prevailing market conditions, it was decided  to deregulate interest rates on Non-Resident (External) Rupee (NRE) Deposits  and Ordinary Non-Resident (NRO) Accounts (the interest rates on term deposits  under Ordinary Non-Resident (NRO) Accounts are already deregulated).  Accordingly, banks are free to determine their interest rates on both savings  deposits and term deposits of maturity of one year and above under Non-Resident  (External) Rupee (NRE) Deposit accounts and savings deposits under Ordinary  Non-Resident (NRO) Accounts with effect from December 16, 2011. However,  interest rates offered by banks on NRE and NRO deposits cannot be higher than  those offered by them on comparable domestic rupee deposits.
2.
GUIDELINES
Commercial  banks should not pay interest on deposits of money accepted or renewed by them  in Domestic, Ordinary Non-Resident (NRO) and Non-Resident (External) Accounts  (NRE) except in accordance with the rates specified in the
Annex 1
and
2
hereto, as applicable, and  on the terms and conditions specified in the ensuing paragraphs.
2.1
Definitions
For the purpose of  this circular:
(a) “Demand liabilities” and “Time  liabilities” mean the liabilities as shown in the return submitted by the bank  under sub-section (2) of Section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934;
(b) “Demand deposit” means a deposit received  by the bank, which is withdrawable on demand;
(c) “Savings deposit” means a form of demand  deposit which is a deposit account whether designated as “Savings Account”,  “Savings Bank Account”, “Savings Deposit Account” or other account by whatever  name called which is subject to the restrictions as to the number of  withdrawals as also the amounts of withdrawals permitted by the bank during any  specified period;
(d) “Term deposit” means a deposit received  by the bank for a fixed period and which is withdrawable only after the expiry  of the said fixed period and shall also include deposits such as  Recurring/Cumulative/Annuity/Reinvestment deposits, Cash Certificates, and so  on;
(e) “Bulk Deposit” means single Rupee term  deposits of ` 1 crore and  above;
(f) “Notice deposit” means term deposit for  specific period but withdrawable on giving at least one complete banking day’s  notice;
(g) “Current Account” means a form of demand  deposit wherefrom withdrawals are allowed any number of times depending upon  the balance in the account or up to a particular agreed amount and shall also  be deemed to include other deposit accounts which are neither Savings Deposit  nor Term Deposit;
(h) “Countervailing interest” means any  benefit of interest allowed on any account in the nature of current account  maintained with the bank by its borrower;
(i) “Budgetary allocation” means the  allocation of funds by the Government made through the budget, wherein all the  Government’s expenditure is reflected. Any institution, irrespective of the  fact that it is a Government Department, Semi-Government or Quasi-Government  Body, which receives grants, loans or subsidies from the Government is said to  depend on budgetary allocation. Government grants to institutions are also in  the nature of the budgetary allocation. Government’s subscription to the share  capital of these institutions also forms part of the budgetary allocation.  Local bodies like Municipal Corporations, Zilla Parishads, Taluka Panchayats  and Gram Panchayats are given grants in the nature of ‘compensation and  assignments’, which also form part of budgetary allocation, although taxes  collected by these bodies are not covered under the definition and scope of  budgetary allocation of Central and State Governments;
(j) “Public Sector Bank” means the State Bank of India  constituted under the State Bank of India Act, 1955 or any subsidiary bank as  defined in clause (k) of Section 2 of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary  Banks) Act, 1959 or any corresponding new bank as defined in clause (b) of Section  2 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970  or Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980.
Note: NRO/NRE  deposits can be accepted only by banks, which are authorized by Reserve Bank to  accept such deposits.
2.2
Minimum tenor and rates of interest payable
on  Savings Deposits and on Term Deposits
2.2.A Minimum tenor
(i)
Domestic/  NRO term deposits
The minimum tenor of  domestic/ NRO term deposits is seven days. Prior to November 1, 2004, banks  were permitted to accept term deposits of Rupees Fifteen Lakh and above, for a minimum  maturity period of seven days and, in case of term deposits of less than Rupees  Fifteen Lakh, the minimum maturity period was fifteen days. With effect from  November 1, 2004, the minimum tenor of domestic/NRO term deposits below Rupees Fifteen  Lakh has been reduced from fifteen days to seven days.
(ii)
NRE  deposits
With effect from April 29, 2003, the minimum  maturity period for NRE deposits has been raised from six months to one year,  making the range of the maturity period for fresh NRE term deposits from one to  three years, in line with FCNR(B) deposits. However, banks are allowed to  accept NRE deposits above three years from their Asset-Liability point of view,  provided the rate of interest on such long term deposits is not higher than  that applicable to domestic deposits of comparable maturity.
With effect from August 14, 2013, in order to  pass on the benefit of exemption provided on incremental NRE deposits with  maturity of 3 years and above from CRR/ SLR requirements, banks were given the  freedom to offer interest rates on such deposits without any ceiling. This  dispensation was valid till February 28, 2014. With effect from March 1, 2014,  the interest rate ceiling on NRE deposits reverted to the position prior to  August 14, 2013 i.e. interest rates offered by banks on NRE deposits cannot be  higher than those offered by them on comparable domestic rupee deposits.
2.2.B
Payment of interest
(i) Banks should pay interest on savings deposits  and term deposits, including NRE deposits, at the rates specified in
Annex 1
and
Annex 2
to this circular.
(ii) In view of the satisfactory level of  computerization in commercial bank branches, scheduled commercial banks were advised  to calculate interest on savings bank accounts on a daily product basis with  effect from April 1, 2010.
(iii) Consequent to the deregulation of interest rates  of domestic savings deposits accounts held by residents in India with effect  from October 25, 2011, banks are free to determine their savings bank deposit  interest rate, subject to the following two conditions:
First, each bank will have to offer a uniform interest  rate on savings bank deposits up to Rupees one lakh, irrespective of the amount  in the account within this limit. While  calculating interest on such deposits, banks are required to apply the uniform  rate set by them on end-of-day balance up to Rupees one lakh.
Second, for any  end-of-day savings bank balance  exceeding Rupees one lakh, a bank may provide differential  rates of interest, if it so chooses,  subject to the condition that banks will not discriminate in the matter of  interest paid on such deposits, between one deposit and another of similar  amount, accepted on the same date, at any of its offices.
(iv) A bank must obtain prior approval of its  Board/Asset Liability Management Committee (if powers are delegated by the  Board) for fixing interest rates on deposits.
(v) With effect from November 29, 2013, banks have  the option to pay interest on savings deposit and term deposits at intervals  shorter than quarterly intervals. Interest on savings bank accounts should be  credited on regular basis whether the account is operative or not.
2.2.C
Floating Rate Deposits
On Domestic Term Deposits, a bank may offer  floating rate clearly linked to an anchor rate. In order to ensure  transparency, banks should not use internal or derived rates while offering  floating rate deposit products. Only market-based rupee benchmark rates, which  are directly observable and transparent to the customer, should be used by  banks for pricing their floating rate deposits.
2.2.D
Payment of interest on accounts frozen by  banks
Banks  are advised to follow the procedure detailed below in the case of Term Deposit  Accounts of customers frozen by the orders of the enforcement authorities:
(i) A request letter may be obtained from  the customer on maturity. While obtaining the request letter from the depositor  for renewal, banks should also advise him to indicate the term for which the deposit  is to be renewed. In case the depositor does not exercise his option of  choosing the term for renewal, banks may renew the same for a term equal to the  original term.
(ii) No new receipt is required to be issued.  However, a suitable note should be made regarding renewal in the deposit  ledger.
(iii) Renewal of deposit should be advised by  registered letter / speed post / courier service to the concerned Government  department under advice to the depositor. In the advice to the depositor, the  rate of interest at which the deposit is renewed should also be mentioned.
(iv) If overdue period  does not exceed 14 days on the date of receipt of the request letter, renewal  should be done from the date of maturity. If it exceeds 14 days, banks should  pay interest for the overdue period as per the policy adopted by them, and keep  it in a separate interest free sub-account which should be released when the  original fixed deposit is released.
Further,  with regard to the savings bank accounts frozen by the enforcement authorities,  banks should continue to credit the interest to the account on a regular basis.
2.3
Payment  of interest on fixed deposit - Method of calculation of interest
The Indian Banks’  Association (IBA) Code for Banking Practice has been issued by IBA for uniform  adoption by the Member Banks. The Code is intended to promote good banking  practices by setting out minimum standards, which Member Banks should follow in  their dealings with customers. IBA, for the purpose of calculation of interest  on domestic term deposit, has prescribed that on deposits repayable in less  than three months or where the terminal quarter is incomplete, interest should  be paid proportionately for the actual number of days reckoning the year at 365  days. Some banks are adopting the method of reckoning the year at 366 days in a  Leap year and 365 days in other years. While banks are free to adopt their  methodology, they should provide information to their depositors about the  manner of calculation of interest appropriately while accepting the deposits  and display the same at their branches.
If a Fixed Deposit Receipt  matures and proceeds are unpaid, the amount left unclaimed with the bank will  attract savings bank rate of interest.
2.4
Additional interest to Army Group  Insurance Directorate (AGID),
Naval  Group Insurance Fund (NGIF) and Air-Force  Group Insurance Society (AFGIS)
A  Public Sector Bank is permitted to pay additional interest of 1.28 per cent per  annum over and above the normal rate of interest permissible in terms of  directives on interest rates on deposits issued by Reserve Bank of India, from  time to time, only on the term deposits for two years and above of Army Group  Insurance Directorate (AGID), Naval Group Insurance Fund (NGIF) and Air-Force  Group Insurance Society (AFGIS), provided such deposits are not in any way  linked with payment of insurance premia by the bank.
2.5
Discretion to pay additional interest  not exceeding one percent
on  deposits of bank’s staff and their exclusive associations
A  bank may, at its discretion, allow additional interest at a rate not exceeding  one per cent per annum over and above the rate of interest stipulated in
Annex  1
&
2
to this circular subject to following conditions:
2.5.1 In respect of a savings or a term deposit  account opened in the name of:
a member or a retired member of the bank’s staff,  either singly or jointly with any member or members of his/her family; or
the spouse of a deceased member or a deceased  retired member of the bank’s staff; and
an Association or a fund, members of which are members of the bank’s  staff;
A bank should obtain a  declaration from the depositor concerned, that the monies deposited or which  may, from time to time, be deposited into such account belong to the depositor  as stated in clauses (a) to (c) above.
2.5.2 For the purposes of sub-paragraph 2.5.1:
(i) “a member of the bank’s staff” means a  person employed on a regular basis, whether full-time or part-time, and  includes a person recruited on probation or employed on a contract of a specified  duration or on deputation and an employee taken over in pursuance of any scheme  of amalgamation, but does not include a person employed on casual basis.
In the case  of employees taken on deputation from another bank, the bank from which they  are deputed may allow additional interest in respect of the savings or term  deposit account opened with it during the same period of deputation;
In the case of persons taken  on deputation for a fixed duration, or on a contract of a fixed duration, the  benefit will cease to accrue on the expiry of the term of deputation or  contract, as the case may be.
(ii) “A retired member of the bank’s staff”  means an employee retiring whether on superannuation or otherwise as provided  in the bank’s Service/Staff Regulations, but does not include an employee  retired compulsorily or in consequence of disciplinary action;
(iii) “Family” means and includes the spouse of the member/retired  member of the bank’s staff and the children, parents, brothers and sisters of  the member/retired member of the bank’s staff, who are dependent on such  member/retired member, but does not include legally separated spouse;
2.5.3 Payment of additional interest is subject to  the following conditions, namely:
The additional interest is payable only so long as  the person continues to be eligible for the same and in case of his ceasing to  be so eligible, till the maturity of a term deposit account;
In the case of employees  taken over pursuant to the scheme of amalgamation, the additional interest is  allowed only if the interest at the contractual rate together with the  additional interest does not exceed the rate, which could have been allowed if  such employees were originally employed by the bank.
2.5.4 Bank Employees’ Federations in which bank  employees are not direct members are not eligible for additional interest.
2.5.5 In case of Domestic deposits, it will be in  order for banks to give their resident Indian retired staff, who are senior  citizens, the benefit of higher interest rates as admissible to senior citizens  over and above the additional interest of not exceeding one per cent payable to  them by virtue of their being retired members of the banks' staff.
2.5.6 Prior to July 18, 2012, in the case of  Non-Resident (External) deposits of staff members, existing or retired,  interest rate including any additional interest paid to them by virtue of their  being staff members, should not exceed the ceiling stipulated by RBI.
With effect from July 18, 2012 banks should not  allow the benefit of additional interest rate on any type of deposits of  non-residents. Accordingly, the discretion given to banks to allow the benefit  of additional interest rate of one percent per annum as available to bank's own  staff on deposits under NRE/ NRO accounts stands withdrawn.
2.6
Discretion to pay additional interest  not exceeding
one  per cent on deposits of Chairman and Managing  Director and Executive Directors of the bank
A  bank may, at its discretion, pay additional interest not exceeding one per cent  per annum over and above the rate of interest stipulated in
Annex 1
&
2
to this circular on deposits accepted/renewed from Chairman, Chairman &  Managing Director, Executive Director or such other Executive appointed for a  fixed tenure. However, they are eligible to get the benefit under paragraph 2.6  above only during the period of their tenure.
2.7
Discretion to pay interest on current  accounts maintained
by  Regional Rural Banks with sponsor banks
Banks  may pay interest on current account of a Regional Rural Bank sponsored by them.  However, banks are encouraged not to pay interest on the current accounts  maintained by RRBs with them.
2.8
Discretion to pay interest on the  minimum credit balance
in  the composite cash credit account of a farmer
A bank may, at its discretion, pay interest at a  rate based on its perception and other relevant factors on the minimum credit  balance in the composite cash credit account of a farmer during the period from  the 10th to the last day of each calendar month.
2.9
Deposit  Scheme for Senior Citizens
(i) Banks  have been permitted to formulate, with the approval of their Boards of  Directors, fixed deposit schemes specifically for resident Indian senior  citizens, offering higher and fixed rates of interest as compared to normal  deposits of any size. These schemes should also incorporate simplified  procedures for automatic transfer of deposits to the nominee of such depositors  in the event of death. The above additional interest is not applicable to any  type of non-resident deposits.
(ii) In the case of a term deposit which is  standing in the name of an HUF, the Karta of the Hindu Undivided Family (HUF)  cannot be offered higher rate of interest, even if he is a resident Indian senior  citizen, as the beneficial owner of the deposit is the HUF and not the Karta in  his individual capacity.
2.10
Premature  withdrawal of term deposit
(i) A bank, on request from the depositor, should allow  withdrawal of a term deposit before completion of the period of the deposit  agreed upon at the time of making the deposit. The bank will have the freedom  to determine its own penal interest rate of premature withdrawal of term  deposits. The bank should ensure that the depositors are made aware of the  applicable penal rate along with the deposit rate. While prematurely closing a  deposit, interest on the deposit for the period that it has remained with the  bank will be paid at the rate applicable to the period for which the deposit  remained with the bank and not at the contracted rate. No interest is payable,  where premature withdrawal of deposits takes place before completion of the  minimum period prescribed. Prior to  April 1, 2013, the bank had discretion to disallow premature withdrawal of  large deposits held by entities other than individuals and HUFs.. With effect  from April 1, 2013, banks will have the discretion to disallow premature  withdrawal of a term deposit in respect of bulk deposit of Rupees one crore and  above of all depositors, including deposits of individuals and HUFs. The bank  should, however, notify such depositors of its policy of disallowing premature  withdrawal in advance, i.e., at the time of accepting such deposits. A bank on  request from a depositor shall allow withdrawal of a Rupee term deposit of less  than Rupees one crore, before completion of the period of the deposit agreed  upon at the time of making the deposit. Bank will have the freedom to determine  its own penal interest rates for premature withdrawal of term deposits. Bank  should ensure that the depositors are made aware of the applicable penal rates  along with the deposit rates.
(ii) In the  case of premature withdrawal of NRE term deposits for conversion into Resident  Foreign Currency (RFC) Account, the bank should not levy any penalty for  premature withdrawal. If such a deposit  has not run for a minimum period of 1 year, the bank may, at its discretion,  pay interest at a rate not exceeding the rate payable on savings deposits held  in RFC accounts, provided the request for such a conversion is made by the NRE  account holder immediately on return to India.
(iii) Conversion  of NRE deposit into FCNR(B) deposit and vice versa before maturity should be  subject to the penal provisions relating to premature withdrawal.
2.11
Conversion of a term deposit, a deposit  in the form of daily
deposit  or a recurring deposit for reinvestment in term deposit
A  bank, on a request from the depositor, should allow conversion of a term  deposit, a deposit in the form of daily deposit or recurring deposit, to enable  the depositor to immediately reinvest the amount lying in the aforesaid  deposits with the same bank in another term deposit. For the period upto April 19,  2010, banks were required to pay interest in respect of  such term deposits without reducing the interest by way of penalty, provided  that the deposit remained with the bank after reinvestment for a period longer  than the remaining period of the original contract. However, on a review and in order to  facilitate better asset-liability management (ALM), with effect from April 20,  2010, banks are permitted to formulate their own policies towards conversion of  deposits.
2.12
Renewal  of Overdue deposits
All aspects concerning renewal of overdue  deposits may be decided by individual banks subject to their Board laying down  a transparent policy in this regard and the customers being notified of the  terms and conditions of renewal including interest rates, at the time of  acceptance of deposit. The policy should  be non-discretionary and non-discriminatory.
2.13
Advance  against term deposit - Manner of charging interest
(a) When an advance is granted against a  term deposit and the deposit stands in the name of -
(i) the borrower, either singly or  jointly;
(ii) one of the partners of a  partnership firm and the advance is made to the said firm;
(iii) the proprietor of a proprietary  concern and the advance is made to such a concern;
(iv) a  ward whose guardian is competent to borrow on behalf of the ward and where the  advance is made to the guardian of the ward in such a capacity;
the bank would be free  to charge interest rate without reference to its Base Rate including advances  granted against NRE term deposits and repaid in Foreign Currency or Rupees.
If the term deposit  against which an advance was granted is withdrawn before completion of the prescribed  minimum maturity period, such an advance should not be treated as advance  against the term deposit and interest should be charged as prescribed in terms  of the Reserve Bank of India’s directive on Interest Rates on Advances issued  from time to time.
(b) The account holder of NRE savings  deposits can withdraw the savings deposits at any time and therefore, banks  should not mark any type of lien, direct or indirect, against these deposits.  (As regards domestic saving deposits, banks may follow the guidelines issued by  IBA / existing practices approved by their Board in this regard.)
2.14
Margin  on advance against term deposit
The decision in regard  to margin against term deposit has been left to the discretion of individual  banks subject to their Board laying down a transparent policy in this regard.
2.15
Restrictions  on advances against NR(E)RA and FCNR (B) Deposits -
Quantum of loans
With effect from April  28, 2009, banks were prohibited from granting fresh loans or renew existing  loans in excess of Rs. 100 lakh against security of funds held in NR(E)RA and  FCNR(B) deposits either to the depositors or third parties.
With effect from October 12, 2012, banks may  grant loans against NR(E)RA and FCNR(B) deposits either to the depositors or  the third parties as under:-
Existing    provision
Revised    provision
Rupee    loans* in India
Loans    against NRE/FCNR(B) Fixed Deposits
Rs. 100    lakh ceiling applicable
Rupee    loans to be allowed to depositor/third party without any ceiling subject to    usual margin requirements**
Foreign    Currency loans* in India/ outside India
Loans    against NRE/FCNR(B) Fixed Deposits
Rs. 100    lakh ceiling applicable
Foreign    Currency loans to be allowed to depositor/third party without any ceiling    subject to usual margin requirements **
* The term ‘loan’ shall include all types of  fund based/non-fund based facilities.
** In case of FCNR (B) deposits the margin  requirement shall be notionally calculated on the rupee equivalent of the  deposits in accordance with para 9(2) of Schedule-2 of Foreign Exchange  Management (Deposit) Regulations, 2000.
Further, the facility of premature withdrawal of  NRE/FCNR deposits shall not be available where loans against such deposits are  to be availed of. This requirement may specifically be brought to the notice of  the deposit holder at the time of sanction of the loan. The existing loans  which are not in conformity with the above instructions shall continue for  their existing term and shall not be rolled over/renewed. Other conditions as  regards grant of loan against NRE/FCNR deposits shall remain unchanged.
2.16
Interest  payable on the deposit account of deceased depositor
(a) In the case of a term deposit standing in  the name/s of
(i) a deceased individual  depositor, or
(ii) two or more joint  depositors, where one of the depositor has died,
the criterion for payment of  interest on matured deposits in the event of death of the depositor in the  above cases has been left to the discretion of individual banks subject to  their Board laying down a transparent policy in this regard.
(b) In the case of balances lying in current  account standing in the name of a deceased individual depositor/sole  proprietorship concern, interest should be paid only from May 1, 1983, or from  the date of death of the depositor, whichever is later, till the date of  repayment to the claimant/s at the rate of interest applicable to savings  deposit as on the date of payment.
Note: In the case of an NRE deposit, when the  claimants are residents, the deposit on maturity should be treated as a  domestic rupee deposit and interest should be paid for the subsequent period at  a rate applicable to a domestic deposit of similar maturity.
2.17
Notifying  RBI regarding change in interest on deposits and also the break-up of deposits  according to different interest rate ranges
As per the  instructions issued in September, 1997, as and when the deposit rate structure  and PLR are revised, banks were required to furnish the same to RBI, Department  of Banking Operations and Development (DBOD) in the prescribed proforma (Return  No. 7 of Manual of Instructions). Since  banks submit similar information to RBI’s Monetary Policy Department,  submission of the return to DBOD has been discontinued.
2.18
Addition  or deletion of the name/s of joint account holders
A bank may, at the  request of all the joint account holders, allow the addition or deletion of  name/s of joint account holder/s if the circumstances so warrant or allow an  individual depositor to add the name of another person as a joint account  holder. However, in no case should the amount or duration of the original  deposit undergo a change in any manner in case the deposit is a term deposit.
A bank may, at its  discretion, and at the request of all the joint account holders of a deposit  receipt, allow the splitting up of the joint deposit, in the name of each of  the joint account holders only, provided that the period and the aggregate  amount of the deposit do not undergo any change.
2.18A
Resident  Bank Account Maintained by Residents in India- Joint holder- Liberalisation
In terms of A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.12  dated September 15, 2011 issued by our Foreign Exchange Department (FED),  individuals resident in India were permitted to include non-resident close  relative(s) (relatives as defined in Section 6 of the Companies Act, 1956) as a  joint holder(s) in their resident savings bank accounts on "former or  survivor" basis. Such non-resident Indian close relatives are however not  eligible to operate the account during the life time of the resident account  holder in terms of said instructions.
On a review, FED vide circular A.P (DIR Series)  circular No. 87 dated January 9, 2014, has decided that AD banks may include an  Non-Resident Indian (NRI as defined in Regulation 2(vi) of FEMA Notification  No.5 dated May 3, 2000) close relative (relatives as defined in Section 6 of  Companies Act, 1956) in existing/ new resident bank accounts as joint holder on  “Either or Survivor” basis subject to following conditions:
a) Such account will be treated as resident  bank account for all purposes and all regulations applicable to a resident bank  account shall be applicable.
b) Cheques,  instruments, remittances, cash, card or any other proceeds belonging to the NRI  close relative shall not be eligible for credit to this account.
c) The NRI close  relative shall operate such account only for and on behalf of the resident for  domestic payment and not for creating any beneficial interest for himself.
d) Where the NRI  close relative becomes a joint holder with more than one resident in such  account, such NRI close relative should be the close relative of all the  resident bank account holders.
e) Where due to any  eventuality, the non-resident account holder becomes the survivor of such an  account, it shall be categorized as Non-Resident Ordinary Rupee (NRO) account  as per the extant regulations.
f) Onus will be on  the non-resident account holder to keep AD bank informed to get the account  categorized as NRO account and all such regulations as applicable to NRO  account shall be applicable.
g) The above joint account  holder facility may be extended to all types of resident accounts including  savings bank account.
2.19
Rounding  off of transactions
All transactions,  including payment of interest on deposits/charging of interest on advances,  should be rounded off to the nearest rupee i.e., fractions of fifty paise and  above shall be rounded off to the next higher rupee and fractions of less than fifty  paise shall be ignored. Issue prices of cash certificates should also be  rounded off in the same manner.
In the light of a judgement of the High Court of  Gujarat, Ahmedabad, banks were advised that they should ensure that cheques/  drafts issued by clients containing fractions of a rupee are not rejected or  dishonoured by them. Banks should also  review the practice being followed by them in this regard and take necessary  steps including through issue of internal circulars, etc, to ensure that the  concerned staff are well versed with these instructions so that the general  public does not suffer. Further, banks should ensure that appropriate action is  taken against members of their staff who are found to have refused to accept  cheques/ drafts containing fractions of a rupee. Any bank violating the  aforesaid instructions would be liable to be penalised under the provisions of  the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
2.20
Issue  of term deposit receipt
(a) A bank should issue term deposit receipt  indicating therein full details, such as date of issue, period of deposit, due  date, applicable rate of interest, etc.
(b) It has been observed  that Scheduled Commercial Banks, during the course of acting as Professional  Clearing Members of Stock Exchanges/ Clearing Corporations, issue own Fixed  Deposit Receipts with zero percent interest as security in favour of the  Clearing Corporations. In this connection, it is advised that a Term Deposit  Receipt (TDR)/ Fixed Deposit Receipt (FDR) is acknowledgement for a deposit  received by a bank for a fixed term which is withdrawable only after the expiry  of the said fixed period. A bank issues TDR indicating therein full details,  such as date of issue, period of deposit, due date, applicable rate of interest  etc. As such, issue of TDR/ FDR without a corresponding term deposit/ fixed deposit  account in the books of the bank is not in order and will amount to violation  of the extant guidelines on acceptance of deposits. The rate of interest  payable on such deposits would be subject to the extant guidelines on ‘Interest  Rates on Rupee Deposits held in domestic, Ordinary Non-Resident (NRO) and  Non-Resident (External) (NRE) Accounts’.
2.21
Payment of interest on term deposit  maturing
on  Sunday/holiday/non-business working day
In case of reinvestment deposits and recurring  deposits, banks should pay interest for the intervening  Sunday/holiday/non-business working day (as also Saturday in case of NRE  deposits) on the maturity value. However, in the case of ordinary term  deposits, the interest for the intervening Sunday/holiday/non-business working  day (as also Saturday in case of NRE deposits) should be paid on the original  principal amount.
2.22.A
Deposit  Mobilisation Schemes
Banks need not obtain prior concurrence of the  Indian Banks’ Association or prior approval of the RBI for introduction of  their new domestic deposit mobilisation schemes. However, before launching new  domestic deposit mobilisation schemes with the approval of their respective  Boards, banks should ensure that the provisions of RBI directives on interest  rates on deposits, premature withdrawal of term deposits, sanction of  loans/advances against term deposits, etc., issued from time to time, are  strictly adhered to. Any violation in this regard will be viewed seriously and  may attract penalty under the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
2.22.B
Special  Term Deposit Products with Lock-in Period
Some banks were  offering special term deposit products to customers, in addition to regular  term deposits, ranging from 300 days to five years, with the following  features:
Lock-in periods ranging from 6 to 12 months;
During the lock-in period, premature withdrawal is  not permitted. In case of premature withdrawal during the lock-in period, no  interest is paid;
Rates of interest offered on these deposits are not  in tune with the rates of interest on normal deposits;
Part pre-payment is allowed  by some banks, subject to certain conditions.
As the special  schemes, with lock-in periods and other features referred to above, which have  been floated by some banks, were not in conformity with our instructions, banks  that have floated such deposit schemes were advised to discontinue the schemes.
2.23A
Minimum  balance in savings bank accounts
At  the time of opening the accounts, banks should inform their customers in a  transparent manner the requirement of maintaining minimum balance and levying  of charges etc., if the minimum balance is not maintained. Any charge levied  subsequently should be transparently made known to all depositors in advance  with one month's notice. The banks should inform, at least one month in  advance, the existing account holders any change in the prescribed minimum  balance and the charges that may be levied if the prescribed minimum balance is  not maintained.
2.23B
Minimum  Balances in Inoperative Accounts
with effect from May 6, 2014, banks are not  permitted to levy penal charges for non-maintenance of minimum balances in any  inoperative account.
2.24 Basic Savings Bank Deposit  Account (BSBDA)
In supersession of instructions contained in
circular DBOD.No.Leg.BC.44/09.07.005/2005-06 dated November 11, 2005
, banks  are advised to offer a 'Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account' which will offer  following minimum common facilities to all their customers :
i. The 'Basic Savings Bank Deposit  Account' should be considered a normal banking service available to all.
ii. This account shall not have the  requirement of any minimum balance.
iii. The services available in the  account will include deposit and withdrawal of cash at bank branch as well as  ATMs; receipt / credit of money through electronic payment channels or by means  of deposit / collection of cheques drawn by Central / State Government agencies  and departments;
iv. While there will be no limit on  the number of deposits that can be made in a month, account holders will be  allowed a maximum of four withdrawals in a month, including ATM withdrawals;  and
v. Facility of ATM card or  ATM-cum-Debit Card;
vi. The above facilities will  be provided without any charges. Further, no charge will be levied for  non-operation / activation of in-operative 'Basic Savings Bank Deposit  Account'.
vii. Banks would be free to evolve  other requirements including pricing structure for additional value-added  services beyond the stipulated basic minimum services on reasonable and  transparent basis and applied in a non-discriminatory manner.
viii. The 'Basic Savings Bank Deposit  Account' would be subject to RBI instructions on Know Your Customer (KYC) /  Anti-Money Laundering (AML) for opening of bank accounts issued from time to  time. If such account is 
    opened on the basis of simplified KYC  norms, the account would additionally be treated as a 'Small Account' and would  be subject to conditions stipulated for such accounts in the Master Circular on  'KYC norms / AML standards / Combating of Financing of Terrorism (CFT) /  Obligation of banks under PMLA, 2002'.
ix. Holders of 'Basic Savings Bank  Deposit Account' will not be eligible for opening any other savings bank  deposit account in that bank. If a customer has any other existing savings bank  deposit account in that bank, he / she will be required to close it within 30  days from the date of opening a 'Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account'.
x. The existing basic banking 'no-frills'  accounts should be converted to 'Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account' as per the  instructions contained above.
2.25
Exemptions
The provisions in the  above paragraphs will not apply to:
(i) A deposit received by  the bank:
from the  institutions permitted to participate in the Call/Notice/Term Money Market both  as lenders and borrowers, namely, all Scheduled Commercial Banks (excluding  RRBs), Co-operative Banks and Primary  Dealers;
for which it  has issued a participation certificate;
under  Foreign Currency (Non-Resident) Accounts (Banks) Scheme, Resident Foreign  Currency Account and Exchange Earners Foreign Currency Accounts;
under the  Capital Gains Accounts Scheme, 1988, framed by the Government of India in  pursuance of sub-section (2) of Section 54, sub-section (2) of Section 54B,  sub-section (2) of Section 54D, sub-section (4) of Section 54F and sub-section (2) of  Section 54G of the Income-Tax Act, 1961; and
under the Certificate of  Deposit Scheme.
(ii) Payment of interest on  delayed collection of outstation instruments like cheques, drafts, bills,  telegraphic/mail transfers, etc.
2.26
Prohibitions
No bank should -
(a) pay  interest on Current Account save as provided in paragraphs 2.7 and 2.16 (b)  above;
(b) pay  countervailing interest on any current accounts maintained with it by its  borrowers;
(c) discriminate  in the matter of interest paid on deposits, between one deposit and another,  accepted on the same date and for the same maturity, whether such deposits are  accepted at the same office or at different offices of the bank, except in  respect of fixed deposit schemes specifically for resident Indian senior  citizens offering higher and fixed rates of interest as compared to normal  deposits of any size, and single term deposits of Rupees one crore and above on which varying  rates of interest may be permitted on the basis of size of deposits. The  permission to offer varying rates of interest is subject to the following  conditions:
(i) The  permission to offer varying rates of interest for deposits of the same maturity  applies to single term deposits of Rupees one crore and above. Banks should,  therefore, offer the same rate of interest or different rates of interest for  deposits of Rupees one crore and above of the same maturity. For deposits below  Rupees one crore of the same maturity, the same rate will apply. Rupee term  deposits shall include domestic term deposits as well as term deposits under  NRO and NRE accounts. These instructions have been made applicable from April  1, 2013. Prior to this, banks were permitted to offer, at their discretion,  differential rates of interest on single term deposits of same maturity of  Rupees fifteen lakh and above, subject to certain conditions. In this regard,  it is clarified that it will not be in order for banks to offer  higher/differential rate of interest, as compared to other deposits of similar  tenure, on deposit schemes framed by them on the basis of the Bank Term Deposit  Scheme, 2006, announced by Government of India vide their notification No.  203/2006 dated July 28, 2006. It will also not be in order for banks to offer  higher/ differential rate of interest  on deposits received under the Capital Gains Accounts Scheme, 1988.
(ii) Banks  should disclose in advance the schedule of interest rates payable on deposits  including deposits on which differential interest will be paid. Interest rates  paid by the bank should be as per the schedule and should not be subject to  negotiation between the depositor and the bank.
(d) pay  brokerage in the form of commission or gift or incentives on deposits in any  manner or in any other form to any individual, firm, company, association,  institution or any other person except -
(i) commission paid to agents employed to  collect door-to-door deposits under a special scheme. Banks have also been  permitted to use the services of Non-Governmental Organisations(NGOs)/ Self  Help Groups(SHGs)/ Micro Finance Institutions(MFIs) and other Civil Society  Organisations(CSOs) as intermediaries in providing financial and banking  services including collection of deposits through the use of the Business  Facilitator and Business Correspondent models. Banks may pay reasonable  commission/ fee to the Business Facilitators/ Correspondents, the rate and  quantum of which may be reviewed periodically. The agreement with the Business Facilitators/  Correspondents should specifically prohibit them from charging any fee to the  customers directly for services rendered by them on behalf of the bank.
(ii) inexpensive  gifts costing not more than Rupees two hundred fifty ; and
(iii) incentives granted to staff members as approved  by the Reserve Bank of India from time to time.
(e) employ/  engage any individual, firm, company, association, institution or any other  person for collection of deposit or for selling any other deposit linked  products on payment of remuneration or fees or commission in any form or  manner, except to the extent permitted in sub-clause (i) of clause (d) above.
(f) launch  prize/lottery/free trips (in India and/or abroad), etc. oriented deposit  mobilisation schemes. It is clarified  that banks should not offer any banking products, including online remittance  schemes, with prizes /lottery/free trips (in India and/or abroad), etc. or any  other incentives having an element of chance, except inexpensive gifts costing  not more than Rupees two hundred fifty only, as such products involve non-transparency  in the pricing mechanism and therefore go against the spirit of the guidelines.  Such products, if offered, by banks would be considered as violation of the  extant guidelines and the banks concerned would be liable for penal action.
(g) resort  to unethical practices of raising of resources through agents/third parties to  meet the credit needs of the existing/prospective borrowers or to grant loans  to the intermediaries based on the consideration of deposit mobilisation.
(h) issue  any advertisement/literature soliciting deposits from public highlighting only  the compounded yield on term deposits without indicating the actual rate of  simple interest offered by the bank for the particular period. Simple rate of interest per annum for the  period of deposit should be indicated invariably.
(i) pay  interest on margin money held in current account.
(j) pay  interest on “deposit at call” receipts issued by it to the tenderers  (contractors) for submission to Government Departments/Semi-Quasi Government bodies,  local bodies, etc. against the money held in current account.
(k) accept  interest-free deposit other than in current account or pay compensation  indirectly.
(l) accept  deposits from/at the instance of private financiers or unincorporated bodies  under any arrangement which provides for either issue of deposit receipt/s  favouring client/s of private financiers or giving of an authority by power of  attorney, nomination or other-wise, for such clients receiving such deposits on  maturity.
(m) grant  advances against fixed deposit receipts or other term deposits of other banks.
(n) (i) open a savings deposit account in the  name of Government departments/bodies depending upon budgetary allocations for  performance of their functions/Municipal Corporations or Municipal Committees/  Panchayat Samitis/State Housing Boards/Water and Sewerage/Drainage Boards/State  Text Book Publishing Corporations/ Societies/Metropolitan Development Authority  / State/ District Level Housing Co-operative Societies, etc. or any political  party or any trading/business or professional concern, whether such concern is  a proprietary or a partnership firm or a company or an association.
Explanation
For the purposes of this clause, ‘political  party’ means an association or body of individual citizens of India, which is,  or is deemed to be registered with the Election Commission of India as a  political party under the Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order,  1968 as in force for the time being.
(ii) The  above prohibition will not apply in the case of organisations/agencies listed  in
Annex 3
.
ANNEX 1
Rates of Interest on  Deposits held in Domestic/Ordinary Non-Resident (NRO) Accounts
[paragraph 2.2B(i)]
[Percent per annum]
Category    of Account
(i)
Current
Nil
(ii)
Savings*
4.0 (from May 3, 2011 to October    24, 2011)
Free (with effect from October 25, 2011)
(iii)
Term Deposits* (minimum period 7    days)
Free
* For operational  convenience, the interest rates on domestic / NRO accounts should be rounded  off to the nearest two decimal points.
*Interest rates on NRO savings deposits for the  period May 3 to December 15, 2011 was 4% p.a. With effect from December 16,  2011, the interest rates are deregulated. However, interest rates offered by banks on NRO deposits cannot be  higher than those offered by them on comparable domestic rupee deposits.
ANNEX 2
Interest  rates applicable to deposits held in
Non-Resident  (External) Accounts
[paragraph 2.2B(i)]
(i)
Current
Nil
(ii)
Savings    Account
With effect from December 16, 2011, the interest    rates are deregulated. However,    interest rates offered by banks on NRE deposits cannot be higher than those    offered by them on comparable domestic rupee deposits.
Since interest rate of domestic    savings deposits was deregulated w.e.f October 25, 2011, the interest rate on    NRE savings deposits for the period October 25 to December 15, 2011 was as    prescribed in the circular DBOD.Dir.BC.89 & 90/13.03.00/2010-11 at 4% per    annum.
From the close of business in India    on November 17, 2005 to October 24, 2011, the interest rates on NRE savings    deposits should be the same as applicable to domestic savings deposits    instead of the LIBOR/SWAP rate for six months maturity on US dollar deposits.
(iii)
Term Deposits
With effect from August 14, 2013, in    order to pass on the benefit of exemption provided on incremental NRE    deposits with maturity of 3 years and above from CRR/ SLR requirements, banks    were given the freedom to offer interest rates on such deposits without any    ceiling. This dispensation was valid till February 28, 2014. With effect from    March 1, 2014, the interest rate ceiling on NRE deposits reverted to the    position prior to August 14, 2013 i.e. interest rates offered by banks on NRE    deposits cannot be higher than those offered by them on comparable domestic    rupee deposits.
With effect from the close of    business in India on December 16, 2011, interest rates on Non-Resident    (External) Rupee (NRE) Deposits are deregulated. Accordingly, banks are free    to determine their interest rates on both term deposits of maturity of one    year and above under Non-Resident (External) Rupee (NRE) Deposit accounts.
From the close of business in India    on November 23 to December 15, 2011, interest rates on NRE deposits for one    to three years should not exceed the LIBOR/SWAP rates plus 275 basis points,    as on the last working day of the previous month, for US dollar of    corresponding maturities (as against LIBOR / SWAP rates plus 175 basis points    effective from close of business on November 15, 2008).
From the close of business in India    on November 15, 2008 to November 22, 2011, interest rates on NRE deposits for    one to three years should not exceed the LIBOR/SWAP rates plus 175 basis    points, as on the last working day of the previous month, for US dollar of    corresponding maturities (as against LIBOR / SWAP rates plus 100 basis points    effective from close of business on October 15, 2008).
The LIBOR/SWAP rates as on the last    working day of the preceding month would form the base for fixing ceiling    rates for the interest rates that would be offered effective from the    following month.
The above changes in interest rates    will also apply to repatriable NRE deposits renewed after their present    maturity period.
With effect    from April 29, 2003, , the maturity period of fresh NRE deposits should    normally be one year to three years. In case a particular bank, from its    Asset Liability Management point of view, wishes to accept deposits with    maturity of more than 3 years, it may do so. Consequent upon the deregulation    of interest rates on NRE deposits with effect from December 16, 2011 banks    are free to determine interest rates on NRE deposits of different maturity,    including deposits of more than 3 years subject to such rates not being    higher than those offered on domestic deposits of comparable maturity.
For the purposes of operational    convenience, the interest rates should be rounded off to the nearest two    decimal points. For example, a computed interest rate of 3.676 per cent would    become 3.68 per cent, and 3.644 per cent would become 3.64 per cent.
FEDAI quotes/displays the LIBOR/SWAP    rates on the last working day of each month using a web page that can be    accessed by all the subscribers to the Reuters Screen. The rates should be    taken as the base rates for fixing ceiling on the interest rates that can be    offered effective from the following month.
ANNEX 3
List of organisations/bodies to which  the prohibition contained in
Clause 2.26(n)(i) of the directive will not be  applicable
(1)
Primary    Co-operative Credit Society which is being financed by the bank.
(2)
Khadi and    Village Industries Boards.
(3)
Agriculture    Produce Market Committees.
(4)
Societies    registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 or any other    corresponding law in force in a State or a Union Territory except societies    registered under the State Co-operative Societies Acts and specific state    enactment creating Land Mortgage Banks. .
(5)
Companies governed by the Companies    Act, 1956 which have been licensed by the Central Government    under Section 25 of the said Act, or    under the corresponding provision in the Indian Companies Act, 1913 and permitted, not to add to their names the words ‘Limited’ or the words ‘Private Limited’.
(6)
Institutions other than those mentioned in clause 2.26(n)(i)    and whose entire income is exempt from payment of Income-tax under the    Income-Tax Act, 1961.
(7)
Government    departments / bodies / agencies in respect of grants/ subsidies released for    implementation of various programmes / Schemes sponsored by Central    Government / State Governments subject to production of an authorization from    the respective Central / State Government departments to open savings bank    account.
(8)
Development of Women and Children in Rural Areas    (DWCRA).
(9)
Self-help Groups (SHGs), registered    or unregistered, which are engaged in promoting savings habits among their    members.
(10)
Farmers’ Clubs – Vikas Volunteer Vahini – VVV.
APPENDIX
List of  circulars consolidated in the Master Circular on
Interest  Rates on Rupee Deposits held in  Domestic/NRO/NRE Accounts
Sl
Circular     No.
Date
Subject
1
DBOD.No.Dir.BC.46 & 47/13.03.00/2000-2001
4.11.2000*
Master Directive on Interest Rates on Rupee Deposits held 
      in Domestic, Ordinary Non-Resident (NRO), Non-Resident 
      Special Rupee (NRSR) and Non-Resident (External) (NRE) Accounts
2
DBOD. No.FSC.BC.61/24.91.001/2000
29.12.2000
Permission to Participate in Call/Notice Money Market and 
      Bills Rediscounting Scheme - Private Sector Mutual Funds
3
DBOD.No.Dir.BC.62/13.03.00/2000-01
03.01.2001
Interest Rates on Deposits
4
DBOD.No.Dir.BC.64/13.03.00/2000-01
03.01.2001
Payment of Interest on the Term Deposit of a Deceased Depositor
5
DBOD. No.FSC.BC.80/24.103.001/2000
20.02.2001
Permission to Participate in Call/Notice Money Market  
      and Bills Rediscounting Scheme - Insurance Companies
6
DBOD. No.FSC.BC.85/24.103.001/2001
01.03.2001
Permission to Participate in Call/Notice Money    Market 
      and Bills Rediscounting Scheme - Insurance Companies
7
DBOD.No.Dir. BC.104&107/13.03.00/2000-01
19.04.2001
Monetary and Credit Policy for the year 2001-2002 - 
      Interest Rate Policy
8
DBOD. No.FSC.BC.125/24.92.001/2000-01
25.05.2001
Permission to Participate in Call/Notice/Term Money 
      Market and Bills Rediscounting Scheme - Primary Dealers
9
DBOD. No.FSC.BC.01/24.91.001/2001-02
05.07.2001
Permission to Participate in Call/ Notice Money Market and 
      Bills Rediscounting Scheme - Private Sector Mutual Funds
10
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.30/24.91.001/2001-02
28.09.2001
Permission to Participate in Call/Notice Money Market and 
      Bills Rediscounting Scheme - Private Sector Mutual Funds
11
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.31/24.92.001/2001-02
28.09.2001
Permission to Participate in Call/Notice/Term Money Market 
      and Bills Rediscountinq Scheme - Primary Dealers
12
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.41/24.91.001/2001-02
01.11.2001
Permission to Participate in Call/Notice Money Market and  
      Bills Rediscounting Scheme - Private Sector Mutual Funds
13
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.49/24.92.001/2001-02
24.11.2001
Permission to Participate in Call/Notice/Term Money Market 
      and Bills Rediscounting Scheme - Primary Dealers
14
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.51/24.92.001/2001-02
04.12.2001
Permission to Participate in Call/Notice/Term Money Market  
      and Bills Rediscounting Scheme - Primary Dealers
15
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.85/24.92.001/2001-02
03.04.2002
Permission to Participate in Call/Notice/Term Money 
      Market and Bills Rediscounting Scheme - Primary Dealers
16
DBOD.No.Dir.BC.93/13.01.09/2001-02
29.04.2002
Full Convertibility of Deposit Schemes -
Non-Resident Indians - NRNR Accounts & NRSR Accounts
17
DBOD.No.Dir.BC.38/13.03.00/2002-03
05.11.2002
Mid-term Review of Monetary and Credit Policy for the year 2002-03 - 
      Interest Rates on Deposits by Banks/RRBs/Local Area Banks
18
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.45/24.92.001/2002-03
03.12.2002
Permission to Participate in Call/Notice/Term Money Market 
      and Bills Rediscounting Scheme - Primary Dealers
19
DBOD.No.Dir.BC.50    & 51/13.03.00/2002-03
14.12.2002
Opening of Saving Bank Accounts in 
      the Name of certain Bodies/Organizations
20
DBOD.No.Dir.BC.53/13.10.00/2002-03
26.12.2002
Minimum Balance in Savings Bank Accounts
21
DBOD.No.Dir.BC.75
&
76/13.03.00/2002-03
28.02.2003
Interest Rates on Deposits
22
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.85
&
86/24.91.001/2002-03
26.03.2003
Permission to Participate in Call/Notice/Term Money Market 
      and Bills Rediscounting Scheme - Primary Dealers
23
DBOD.No.FSC.BC.86/24.92.001/2002-03
26.03.2003
Permission to Participate in Call/Notice Money Market and 
      Bills Rediscounting Scheme - Private Sector Mutual Funds
24
DBOD.No.Dir.BC.101&102/13.01.09/2002-03
29.04.2003
Deposit under Non-Resident (External) Rupee Accounts (NRE Accounts)
25
DBOD.No.Dir.BC.1
&
2/13.01.09/2003-04
17.07.2003
Interest Rate on Deposits under Non-Resident 
      (External) Rupee Accounts (NRE Accounts)
26
MPD.BC.237/07.01.279/2003-04
17.07.2003
Interest Rate on Deposits under Non-resident 
      (External) Rupee Account (NRE Accounts)
27
DBOD    No.Dir.BC.25
&
26/13.01.09/2003-04
15.09.2003
Interest Rate on Deposits under Non-Resident (External) Rupee Accounts    (NRE Accounts)
28
DBOD    No.Dir.BC.35
&
36/13.01.09/2003-04
18.10.2003
Interest Rate on Deposits under Non-Resident (External) Rupee Accounts    (NRE Accounts)
29
DBOD    No.Dir.BC.68
&
69/13.03.00/2003-04
13.02.2004
Interest Rates on Rupee Deposits held in Domestic, Ordinary    Non-Resident (NRO) and Non-Resident (External) (NRE) Accounts
30
DBOD    No Dir.BC.75
&
76/13.01.09/2003-04
17.04.2004
Interest Rates on Rupee Deposits held in Domestic, Ordinary    Non-Resident (NRO) and Non-Resident (External) (NRE) Accounts
31
DBOD    No.Dir.BC.78/13.03.00/2003-04
22.04.2004
Committee on Procedures and Performances Audit on Public Services –    Report No. III – Banking Operations : Deposit Accounts & Other Facilities    relating to Individuals (Non-business)
32
DBOD    No. Dir. 53
&
54/13.03.00/2004-05
01.11.2004
Interest rates    on Non-Resident (External) Rupee(NRE) Deposits
33
DBOD.    No. Leg .BC.44/09.07.05/ 2005-06
11.11.2005
Financial    Inclusion
34
DBOD    No. Dir. 48/13.03.00/2005-06
17.11.2005
Interest Rate    on Non-Resident (External) Rupee (NRE) Deposits
35
DBOD.No.BL.BC.58/22.01.001/2005-06
25.01.2006
Financial Inclusion by Extension of Banking Services - Use    of Business Facilitators and Correspondents
36
DBOD    No. Dir. 62/13.03.00/2005-06
08.02.2006
Interest Rates    on Non-Resident Deposits
37
DBOD    No. Dir. 80/13.03.00/2005-06
18.04.2006
Interest Rate    on Non-Resident (External) Rupee (NRE) Deposits
38
A.P.(DIR    Series) Circular No.29
31.01.2007
Foreign Exchange Management (Deposit) Regulations, 2000 –Loans to Non    Residents / third party against security of Non Resident (External) Rupee    Accounts (NR (E) RA) / Foreign Currency Non Resident (Bank) (FCNR(B))    deposits
39
DBOD.No.Dir.BC.54
&
55/13.03.00/2006-07
31.01.2007
Interest Rates on Non-Resident (External) Rupee (NRE) Deposits and    FCNR(B) deposits
40
DBOD.No.Dir.BC.70/13.    01.01/2006-07
30.03.2007
Rounding off    cheques to the nearest rupee
41
DBOD.No.Dir.BC.88
&
89/13.03.00/2006-07
24.04.2007
Interest Rates on Non-Resident (External) Rupee (NRE) Deposits and    FCNR(B) deposits
42
DBOD.No.Leg.BC.94/09.07.005/2006-07
07.05.2007
Annual Policy Statement for the    year 2007- 08 – 
    IT-enabled Financial Inclusion
43
DBOD    No. Dir. BC. 39/13.03.00/2007-08
25.10.2007
Deposit schemes with lock-in    period
44
DBOD.No.Leg.BC.34/09.07.005/2008-09
22.08.2008
Unclaimed Deposits /Inoperative Accounts in banks
45
DBOD.No.Leg.BC.47/09.07.005/2008-09
19.09.2008
Payment of interest on accounts    frozen by banks
46
DBOD.No.Dir.BC.82/13.03.00/2008-09
15.11.2008
Interest Rates on Non-Resident (External) Rupee (NRE) Deposits and    FCNR(B) deposits
47
DBOD.No.Dir.BC.128/13.03.00/2008-09
24.04.2009
Payment of Interest on Savings Bank Account on a Daily Product Basis
48
A.P.    (DIR Series) Circular No.66
28.04.2009
Foreign Exchange Management (Deposit) Regulations, 2000- 
      Loans to Non Residents / third party    against security of Non Resident (External) Rupee Accounts
[NR (E) RA / Foreign Currency Non Resident (Bank) Accounts [FCNR(B)]    -Deposits
49
DBOD.No.Dir.BC.77/13.03.00/2009-10
19.02.2010
Payment of    Interest on Savings Bank Account on Daily Product Basis
50
DBOD.No.Dir.BC.91/13.03.00/2009-10
20.04.2010
Conversion of term deposits, daily deposits or 
      recurring deposits for reinvestment    in term deposits
51
DBOD.Dir.BC.89
&
90/13.03.00/2010-11
03.05.2011
Interest Rates on Deposits
52
A.P.(Dir    Series) Circular No.70
09.06.2011
Remittance of assets by foreign nationals-
Opening of NRO Accounts
53
A.P.(Dir    Series) Circular No. 12
15.09.2011
Savings Bank account maintained by residents in India –
      Joint holder - liberalisation
54
A.P.(Dir    Series) Circular No. 13
15.09.2011
NRIs/PIOs holding NRE/ FCNR(B) accounts jointly with
      Indian resident close relative - liberalisation
55
DBOD.Dir.BC.42/13.03.00/2011-12
25.10.2011
Deregulation of Savings Bank Deposit    Interest Rate-Guidelines
56
DBOD.Dir.BC.59/13.03.00/2011-12
23.11.2011
Interest Rates on Non-resident (external)    Rupee (NRE) Deposits and FCNR(B) Deposits
57
DBOD.Dir.BC.64/13.03.00/2011-12
16.12.2011
Deregulation of Interest Rates on NRE    Deposits and NRO Accounts
58
DBOD.Dir.BC.75/13.03.00/2011-12
25.01 2012
Deregulation of Savings Bank Deposit    Interest Rate-Guidelines
59
DBOD. Dir.    BC. 29/13.03.00/2012-13
18.07.2012
Interest Rates on Rupee Deposits held in    Domestic, NRO and NRE Accounts
60
DBOD.No.Leg.BC.35/09.07.005/2012-13
10.08.2012
Financial Inclusion-Access to Banking    Services on Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account.
61
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 44
12.10.2012
Loans to Non Residents/ third    parties against security of NR(E)RA/ FCNR(B) deposits
62
Mail Box    Clarification
22.10.2012
Interest Rates on Non-Resident    (External) Rupee (NRE) Deposits
63
DBOD.No.    Dir. BC. 74/13.03.00/2012-13
24.01.2013
Interest Rates on and Premature    Withdrawal of Rupee Term Deposits
64
Mail Box    Clarification
03.04.2013
Issue of Term Deposit Receipt
65
DBOD. Dir.    BC. 40/ 13.03.00/ 2013-14
14.08.2013
Deregulation of Interest Rates on Non-Resident (External) Rupee    (NRE) Deposits
66
DBOD.No.Dir.    BC. 69/13.03.00/2013-14
29.11.2013
Periodicity of Payment of Interest on Rupee Savings/ Term Deposits
67
DBOD.No.Dir.BC.    71/ 13.03.00/ 2013-14
29.11.2013
Deregulation of Interest Rates on Non-Resident (External) Rupee    (NRE) Deposits
68
A.P. (DIR    Series) Circular No. 87
09.01.    2014
Resident Bank Account Maintained by Residents in India – Joint    Holder- Liberalisation.
69
DBOD.No.Dir.BC.    90/ 13.03.00/ 2013-14
31.01.2014
Deregulation of Interest Rates on Non-Resident (External) Rupee    (NRE) Deposits
70
DBOD.Dir.BC.No.109/    13.03.00/ 2013-14
06.05.2014
Levy of penal charges on non-maintenance of minimum balances in    Inoperative Accounts
*The circular dated  November 4, 2000 replaces the basic directive dated December 27, 1985 and incorporates  all amendments made/instructions issued upto that date.