(1006 kb)
Frauds – Classification and Reporting
RBI/2014-15/85
DBS.CO.CFMC.BC.No. 1/23.04.001/2014-15
July 01, 2014
The Chairmen & Chief  Executive Officers of all
Scheduled Commercial Banks  (excluding RRBs)
and All India Select Financial Institutions
Dear  Sir,
Frauds  – Classification and Reporting
Please  refer to our letter
DBS.FrMC.BC.No.1  /23.04.001/2013-14 dated July 01, 2013
forwarding the Master Circular on  'Frauds – Classification and Reporting'. It may be noted that the
Master  Circular
consolidates and updates all the instructions issued during the year  since the date of the last Master Circular dated July 01, 2013. The Master  Circular has been updated as on June 30, 2014 and has been placed on the  web-site of the Reserve Bank of India (
www.rbi.org.in
).
Yours faithfully
(Manoj  Sharma)
Chief General Manager
CONTENTS
1
INTRODUCTION
2
CLASSIFICATION OF FRAUDS
3
REPORTING OF FRAUDS TO RBI
3.1  Frauds involving
`
1 lakh and above
3.2  Frauds committed by    unscrupulous borrowers
3.3  Frauds involving
`
100 lakh and above
3.4  Cases of attempted    frauds
4
QUARTERLY RETURNS
4.1 Report on Frauds    Outstanding
4.2 Progress Report on    Frauds
5
REPORTS TO THE BOARD
5.1    Reporting of frauds
5.2 Quarterly Review of    Frauds
5.3 Annual Review of    Frauds
6
GUIDELINES FOR REPORTING FRAUDS TO   POLICE/CBI
7
REPORTING CASES OF THEFT, BURGLARY, DACOITY AND BANK ROBBERIES
ANNEX
FRAUD MONITORING RETURNS
FMR-1: Report on Actual or suspected Frauds in Banks
FMR-2: Quarterly Report on Frauds Outstanding
FMR-3:    Quarterly Progress Report on Frauds
FMR-4: Report on Dacoities/Robberies/Thefts/Burglaries
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 Incidence of frauds, dacoities, robberies,  etc., in banks is a matter of concern. While the primary responsibility of preventing frauds lies with banks  themselves, Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has been advising them from time to  time about the major fraud prone areas and the safeguards necessary for  prevention of frauds. RBI has  also been circulating to banks, the details of frauds of an ingenious nature,  not reported earlier so that banks could introduce necessary safeguards /  preventive measures by way of appropriate procedures and internal checks. Banks  are also being advised about the details of unscrupulous borrowers and related  parties who have perpetrated frauds on other banks so that they could exercise  caution while dealing with them. To facilitate this ongoing process, it is  essential that banks report to RBI complete information about frauds and the  follow-up action taken thereon. Banks may, therefore, adopt the reporting  system for frauds as prescribed in following paragraphs.
1.2 The Chairmen and Managing Directors(CMD)/Chief  Executive Officers (CEOs) of banks must provide focus on the "Fraud  Prevention and Management Function" to enable, among others, effective  investigation of fraud cases and prompt as well as accurate reporting to  appropriate regulatory and law enforcement authorities including Reserve Bank  of India.
1.3 The fraud risk management, fraud monitoring and  fraud investigation function must be owned by the bank's CEO, Audit Committee  of the Board and the Special Committee of the Board, at least in respect of large  value frauds.
1.4 Banks may, with the approval of their respective  Boards, frame internal policy for fraud risk management and fraud investigation  function, based on the governance standards relating to the ownership of the  function and accountability for malfunctioning of the fraud risk management  process in their banks. The broad governance framework driven by the above  standard for ownership and accountability may rest on defined and dedicated  organizational set up and operating processes.
1.5 A reference is invited to paragraph 5.2.4, as  regards reporting of frauds involving
`
100 lakh  and above to Special Committee of the Board.
1.6 It has been observed that frauds are, at times,  detected in banks long after their perpetration. Sometimes, fraud reports are  also submitted to RBI with considerable delay and without complete information.  On some occasions, RBI comes to know about frauds involving large amounts only  through press reports. Banks should, therefore, ensure that the reporting  system is suitably streamlined so that frauds are reported without any  delay. Banks must fix staff  accountability in respect of delays in reporting fraud cases to RBI.
1.7 Delay in reporting of frauds and the consequent  delay in alerting other banks about the modus operandi and issue of caution  advices against unscrupulous borrowers could result in similar frauds being  perpetrated elsewhere. Banks may, therefore, strictly adhere to the timeframe  fixed in this circular for reporting fraud cases to RBI failing which they would  be liable for penal action prescribed under Section 47(A) of the Banking  Regulation Act, 1949.
1.8 A software package on 'Frauds Reporting and  Monitoring System' was supplied to banks in June 2003 and subsequent revisions  carried out in the above package were advised to banks vide RBI Circular DBS.FGV (F) No. 8897/23.10.001/2005-06 dated December 20, 2005. Banks are  required to send the FMR returns and data, as prescribed, in soft copy only  (except in case of FMR-1 return pertaining to fraud cases involving amount of
`
1  lakh and above which is required to be submitted both in hard and soft copies)  to RBI, Central Office as well as the concerned Regional Office of the  Department of Banking Supervision/Senior Supervisory Manager (SSM) (29 banks  listed in the Annex) at Central Office under whose jurisdiction the bank's Head  Office/branch is situated as per the reporting requirements specified in Para  3.1.4 below.
1.9 Banks should specifically nominate an official  of the rank of General Manager who will be responsible for submitting all the  returns referred to in this circular.
1.10 Central Fraud Monitoring Cell, Department of  Banking Supervision, Central Office located at Bengaluru will publish a  directory of officers of all banks/Financial Institutions (FI) responsible for  reporting of Frauds etc All banks/Financial Institutions should furnish to  Department of Banking Supervision, Central  Fraud Monitoring Cell, Bengaluru any changes in the names of officials that  will be necessary for inclusion in the directory on priority basis as and when  called for.
2. CLASSIFICATION OF FRAUDS
2.1 In order to have uniformity in reporting,  frauds have been classified as under, based mainly on the provisions of the  Indian Penal Code:
Misappropriation  and criminal breach of trust.
Fraudulent  encashment through forged instruments, manipulation of books of account or  through fictitious accounts and conversion of property.
Unauthorised  credit facilities extended for reward or for illegal gratification.
Negligence  and cash shortages.
Cheating  and forgery.
Irregularities  in foreign exchange transactions.
Any  other type of fraud not coming under the specific heads as above.
2.2 Cases of 'negligence and cash shortages' and  ‘irregularities in foreign exchange transactions’ referred to in items (d) and  (f) above are to be reported as fraud if  the intention to cheat/defraud is suspected/ proved. However, the following cases where fraudulent intention is not suspected/proved  at the time of detection will be treated as fraud and reported accordingly:
(a) cases of cash shortage more than
`
10,000/-, (including at ATMs) and
(b) cases of cash shortage more than
`
5,000/- if detected by management / auditor/  inspecting officer and not reported on the day of occurrence by the persons  handling cash.
2.3 To ensure uniformity and to avoid duplication,  frauds involving forged instruments may be reported only by the paying banker  and not by the collecting banker. However, in the case of collection of an  instrument which is genuine but the amount is collected fraudulently by a  person who is not the true owner, the collecting bank, which is defrauded, will  have to file fraud report with the RBI. In case of collection of instrument  where the amount has been credited before realisation and subsequently the  instrument is found to be fake/forged and returned by the paying bank, it is  the collecting bank that has to file FMR-1 with the RBI as the collecting bank  is at loss by parting the amount before realisation of the instrument.
2.3.1 The reporting of fraud in respect of truncated  instruments will continue to be done to Central Fraud Monitoring Cell of  Department of Banking Supervision at Bengaluru as well as the concerned  Regional Office of the Department of Banking Supervision/SSM under whose  jurisdiction the bank's Head Office/branch is situated by the paying banks as  hitherto. In cases of frauds due to fake/forged instruments sent in clearing,  the presenting bank will be required to immediately hand over the underlying instrument to drawee/paying bank as  and when demanded to enable it to file an FIR with the police authorities and  report the fraud to RBI.
2.4  Encashment of altered / fake cheques involving two or more branches of the same  bank
2.4.1 In case of collection of altered/fake  cheque involving two or more branches  of the same bank, the branch where the altered/fake cheque has been encashed,  should report the fraud to its Head Office . Thereafter, Head Office of the  bank will file the fraud report with RBI.
2.4.2 In the event of an altered/fake cheque  having been paid/encashed involving two or more branches of a bank under Core  Banking Solution (CBS), there could be a possibility of dispute/difference of  opinion as to whether the branch where the drawer of the cheque maintains the  account or the branch where the encashment has taken place should report the  matter to the Head Office of the bank. In such cases also the branch which has  released the payment against an altered / fake cheque should report the fraud  to the Head Office. Thereafter, Head Office of the bank will file the fraud  report with RBI.
2.5 Cases of theft, burglary, dacoity and robbery  should not be reported as fraud. Such cases may be reported separately as  detailed in paragraph 7.
2.6 Banks (other than foreign banks) having  overseas branches/offices should report all frauds perpetrated at such  branches/offices also to RBI as per the format and procedure detailed under  Paragraph 3 below.
3.	REPORTING OF FRAUDS TO RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
Banks need not furnish FMR-1 return in fraud cases involving amount  below
`
1 lakh to RBI in either hard or soft copy. However, banks at their end  should make the data entry in respect of such cases through the FRMS package  individually in FMR-1 format (less than
`
1 lakh) which will get automatically captured in FMR-2 return and will  form part of the consolidated database relating to frauds for the respective  bank.
3.1 Frauds  involving
`
1 lakh and above
3.1.1 Fraud  reports should be submitted in all cases of fraud of
`
1 lakh and above perpetrated through  misrepresentation, breach of trust, manipulation of books of account,  fraudulent encashment of instruments like cheques, drafts and bills of  exchange, unauthorised handling of securities charged to the bank, misfeasance,  embezzlement, misappropriation of funds, conversion of property, cheating,  shortages, irregularities, etc.
3.1.2 Fraud  reports should also be submitted in cases where central investigating agencies  have initiated criminal proceedings suo motto and/or where the Reserve Bank has  directed that such cases be reported as  frauds.
3.1.3 Banks  may also report frauds perpetrated in their subsidiaries and affiliates/joint  ventures in FMR -1 format in hard copy only. Such frauds should, however, not  be included in the report on outstanding frauds and the quarterly progress  reports referred to in paragraph 4 below. Such frauds will not be entered in  the FRMS package at any stage. Further, in terms of
circular  DBS.FrMC.BC.No.6/23.04.001/2012-13 dated May 23, 2013
, in case the  subsidiary/ affiliates/joint ventures of the bank is an entity which is  regulated by Reserve Bank of India and is independently required to report the  cases of fraud to RBI in terms of guidelines applicable to that  subsidiary/affiliate/joint venture, the parent bank need not furnish the hard  copy of the FMR-1 statement in respect of fraud cases detected at such subsidiary/affiliate/joint  venture.
3.1.4 Soft  copy of the reports on frauds in FMR formats in respect of fraud cases  involving amount of
`
1 lakh and above  should be submitted to the Central Office of the Department of Banking  Supervision (DBS) i.e. Central Fraud Monitoring Cell located at Bengaluru as  well as to Regional Office (RO) of DBS/SSM under whose jurisdiction the Head  office of the bank falls within three weeks of detection of fraud. Reporting of  fraud cases in hard copies to RBI will be as under:-
a) Fraud cases  involving an amount more than
`
1 lakh and upto
`
50 lakh
To the R.O under whose  jurisdiction the branch where the fraud has taken place is located.
To  the R.O under whose jurisdiction the Head Office of the bank where the fraud  has taken place is located.
Note:  - In case the bank falls under the supervisory purview of Senior  Supervisory Manager (SSM) (29 banks listed in the Annex.), the reporting is to  be done to Reserve Bank of India, Senior Supervisory Manager (SSM), Department  of Banking Supervision, Central office,
4th  Floor
, Centre 1, World Trade Centre, Cuffe Parade Mumbai-400005 or to  the respective RBI office where the SSM is located instead of R.O under whose jurisdiction the Head Office of the  bank where the fraud has taken place is located.
b) Fraud cases involving an amount of
`
50 lakh and above.
i) To  the concerned R.O of DBS under whose jurisdiction the Head Office where the  fraud has taken place is located.
Note:  - In case the bank falls under the supervisory purview of Senior  Supervisory Manager (SSM) (29 banks listed in the Annex.), the reporting is to  be done to Reserve Bank of India, Senior Supervisory Manager (SSM), Department  of Banking Supervision, Central office,
4th  Floor
, Centre 1, World Trade Centre, Cuffe Parade Mumbai-400005 or to  the respective RBI office where the SSM is located instead of R.O under whose  jurisdiction the Head Office of the bank where the fraud has taken place is  located.
ii) To  Reserve Bank of India, Central Fraud Monitoring Cell Department of Banking Supervision, 10/3/8, Nruputhunga Road, P.B. No. 5467 Bengaluru – 560001.
3.1.5 It  is observed while scrutinizing FMR 1 returns from the banks, that certain vital  fields in the returns are left blank. As the complete particulars on frauds  perpetrated in the banks are vital for monitoring and supervisory purposes,  banks should ensure that the data furnished are complete/accurate and  up-to-date. Incidentally, if no data is to be provided in respect of any of the  items, or if details of any of the items are not available at the time of  reporting of FMR 1 return, the bank may indicate as “no particulars to be  reported” or “details not available at present” etc. In such a situation, the  banks have to collect the data and report the details invariably through FMR 3  return on quarterly basis.
3.2 Frauds  committed by unscrupulous borrowers
3.2.1 It  is observed that a large number of frauds are committed by unscrupulous  borrowers including companies, partnership firms/proprietary concerns and/or  their directors/partners by various methods including the following:
Fraudulent discount of  instruments or kite flying in clearing effects.
Fraudulent  removal of pledged stocks/disposing of hypothecated stocks without the bank’s  knowledge/inflating the value of stocks in the stock statements and drawing  excess bank finance.
Diversion  of funds outside the borrowing units, lack of interest or criminal neglect on  the part of borrowers, their partners, etc. and also due to managerial failure  leading to the unit becoming sick and  due to laxity in effective supervision over  the operations in borrowal accounts on the part of the bank  functionaries rendering the advance difficult to recover.
3.2.2 In  respect of frauds in borrowal accounts, additional information as prescribed  under Part B of FMR – 1 should also be furnished.
3.2.3 Banks  should exercise due diligence while appraising the credit needs of unscrupulous borrowers,  borrower companies, partnership/ proprietorship concerns and their directors,  partners and proprietors, etc. as also their associates who have defrauded the  banks.
In  addition to above borrower- fraudsters, third parties such as builders,  warehouse/cold storage owners, motor vehicle/tractor dealers, travel agents,  etc. and professionals such as  architects, valuers, chartered accountants, advocates, etc. are also to be held  accountable if they have played a vital role in credit sanction/disbursement or  facilitated the perpetration of frauds. Banks are advised to report to Indian  Banks Association (IBA) the details of such third parties involved in frauds as  advised vide circular DBS.CO.FrMC.BC.No.3/23.08.001/2008-09 dated March 16,  2009.
Before  reporting to IBA, banks have to satisfy themselves of the involvement of third  parties concerned and also provide themwith  an opportunity of being heard. In this regard the banks should follow normal  procedures and the processes followed should be suitably recorded. On the basis  of such information, IBA would, in turn, prepare caution lists of such third  parties for circulation among the banks.
3.2.4
.
Frauds  in borrowal accounts having multiple banking arrangements
Certain unscrupulous borrowers enjoying credit  facilities under "multiple banking arrangement” after defrauding one of  the financing banks, continue to enjoy the facilities with other financing  banks and in some cases avail even higher limits at those banks. In certain  cases the borrowers use the accounts maintained at other financing banks to  siphon off funds by diverting from the bank on which the fraud is being  perpetrated. This is due to lack of a formal arrangement for exchange of  information among various lending banks/FIs. In some of the fraud cases, the  securities offered by the borrowers to different banks are the same.
In  view of this, all the banks which have financed a borrower under 'multiple  banking' arrangement should take  co-ordinated action, based on commonly agreed strategy, for legal / criminal  actions, follow up for recovery, exchange of details on modus operandi, achieving  consistency in data / information on frauds reported to Reserve Bank of India.  Therefore, bank which detects a fraud is required to immediately share the  details with all other banks in the multiple banking arrangements.
3.2.5  Forensic scrutinies at certain identified banks were conducted by RBI due to  occurrence of large value frauds and sharp increase in number of frauds at such  banks to primarily identify the policy gaps, if any, and adequacy of controls.  During the scrutinies, systemic factors were also sought to be identified.  Based on the findings of the scrutinies, the operating framework for tracking  frauds and dealing with them were advised to be structured along the tracks of  detection and reporting of frauds, corrective action and preventive and  punitive action vide our circular dated May 31, 2011.
3.2.6  Banks may ensure to place the copy of the circular on modus-operandi of fraud  issued by them for alerting their branches/controlling offices etc., on  specific frauds before the Audit Committee of Board (ACB) in its periodical  meetings.
3.3 Frauds  involving
`
100 lakh and above
In respect of frauds involving
`
100 lakh and above, in addition to the  requirements given at paragraphs 3.1 and 3.2 above, banks may report the fraud by means of a  D.O. letter addressed to the Principal Chief General Manager, Department of  Banking Supervision, RBI, Central Office, Mumbai within a week of such frauds  coming to the notice of the bank’s Head Office. The letter may contain brief  particulars of the fraud such as amount involved, nature of fraud, modus  operandi in brief, name of the branch/office, names of parties involved (if  they are proprietorship/ partnership concerns or private limited companies, the  names of proprietors, partners and directors), names of officials involved, and  whether the complaint has been lodged with the Police/CBI. A copy of the D.O.  letter should also be endorsed to the Regional Office of RBI/SSM under whose  jurisdiction the bank's branch, where the fraud has been perpetrated, is  functioning.
3.4 Cases  of attempted fraud
Banks  need not report cases of attempted frauds of
`
1 crore and above to Reserve Bank of India, in  terms of
circular  DBS.FrMC.BC.No.04/ 23.04.001/2012-13 dated November 15, 2012
.
However,  the banks should continue to place the report on individual cases of attempted  fraud involving an amount of
`
1  crore and above before the Audit Committee of its Board. The report should cover the following viz.
The modus operandi of the attempted fraud.
How the attempt did not materialize into fraud or       how the attempt failed/ was foiled.
The measures taken by the bank to strengthen the       existing systems and controls
New systems and controls put in place in the  area where fraud was attempted.
Further,  beginning from the year ended March 31, 2013, a consolidated review of such  cases detected during the year containing information such area of operations  where such attempts were made, effectiveness of new processes and procedures  put in place during the year, trend of such cases during the last three years,  need for further change in processes and procedures, if any, etc as on March 31  every year may be put up to the ACB within three months of the end of the  relative year.
4. Quarterly Returns
4.1 Report on Frauds Outstanding
4.1.1 Banks  should submit a soft copy of the Quarterly Report on Frauds Outstanding in the  format given in FMR – 2 to the Central Fraud Monitoring Cell, Department of  Banking Supervision at Bengaluru and the Regional Office of the Department of  Banking Supervision/SSM under whose jurisdiction the Head Office of the bank  falls within 15 days of the end of the quarter to which it relates. The data  should be submitted in soft copy only. Banks which may not be having any fraud  outstanding as at the end of a quarter should submit a
nil
report.
4.1.2 Part  - A of the report covers details of frauds outstanding as at the end of the  quarter. Parts B and C of the report give category-wise and perpetrator-wise  details of frauds reported during the quarter respectively. The total number  and amount of fraud cases reported during the quarter as shown in Parts B and C  should tally with the totals of columns 4 and 5 in Part – A of the report
4.1.3 Banks  should furnish a certificate, as part of the above report, to the effect that  all individual fraud cases of
`
1 lakh and above  reported to the Reserve Bank in FMR – 1 during the quarter have also been put  up to the bank’s Board and have been incorporated in Part – A (columns 4 and 5)  and Parts B and C of FMR – 2.
4.1.4 Closure of fraud cases
Banks  will report to the Central Fraud Monitoring Cell, RBI, Department of Banking Supervision (DBS), Bengaluru  and the respective Regional offices of the DBS/SSM, the details of fraud cases  of
`
1 lakh and above closed along with reasons for the  closure after completing the process as given below.
Fraud  cases closed during the quarter are required to be reported in quarterly return  FMR- 3 and cross checked with relevant column in FMR-2 return before sending to  RBI.
Banks  should report only such cases as closed where the actions as stated below are  complete and prior approval is obtained from the respective Regional Offices of  DBS/SSM.
The  fraud cases pending with CBI/Police/Court are finally disposed of.
The  examination of staff accountability has  been completed
The  amount of fraud has been recovered or written off.
Insurance  claim wherever applicable has been settled.
The  bank has reviewed the systems and procedures, identified as the causative  factors and plugged the lacunae and the fact of which has been certified by the  appropriate authority (Board / Audit Committee of the Board)
Banks  should also pursue vigorously with CBI for final disposal of pending fraud  cases especially where the banks have completed staff side action. Similarly,  banks may vigorously follow up with the police authorities and/or court for  final disposal of fraud cases.
Banks  are allowed, for limited statistical / reporting purposes, to close those fraud cases involving amounts  upto
`
25 lakh, where:
a) The  investigation is on or challan/ charge sheet not filed in the Court for more  than three years from the date of filing of First Information Report (FIR) by  the CBI/Police or
b) The trial in the courts, after filing of charge  sheet / challan by CBI / Police, has not started, or is in progress.
The  banks are required to follow the guidelines relating to seeking prior approval  for closure of such cases from RO of DBS under whose jurisdiction the Head  Office of the bank is located/ SSM and follow up of such cases after closure  for limited statistical purpose as enumerated in RBI
circular  DBS.CO.FrMC BC.NO. 7/ 23.04.001/ 2008-09 dated June 05, 2009
.
4.2 Progress Report  on Frauds (FMR-3)
4.2.1 Banks should furnish case-wise quarterly  progress reports on frauds involving
`
1 lakh and above in  the soft copy format given in FMR – 3 to the Central Fraud Monitoring Cell RBI,  Department of Banking Supervision as well as the concerned Regional Office of  the Department of Banking Supervision/SSM under whose jurisdiction the bank’s  Head Office is situated, within 15 days of the end of the quarter to which they  relate.
4.2.2 In the case of frauds where there are no  developments during a quarter, a list of such cases with a brief description  including name of branch and date of reporting may be furnished in Part – B of  FMR – 3.
4.2.3 Banks  which do not have any fraud involving
`
1 lakh and above  outstanding may submit a
nil
report.
5. REPORTS TO THE BOARD
5.1 Reporting  of Frauds
5.1.1 Banks should ensure that all frauds of
`
1 lakh and above are reported to their Boards  promptly on their detection.
5.1.2 Such reports should, among other things, take note  of the failure on the part of the concerned branch officials and controlling  authorities, and initiate appropriate action against the officials responsible  for the fraud.
5.2 Quarterly  Review of Frauds
5.2.1 As  advised vide
circular DBS.FrMC.BC.No.5/  23.04.001/2012-13 dated January 04, 2013
information  relating to frauds for the quarters  ending June, September and December may be placed before the Audit Committee of  the Board of Directors during the month following the quarter to which it  pertains, irrespective of whether or not these are required to be placed before  the Board/Management Committee in terms of the Calendar of Reviews prescribed  by RBI.
5.2.2 These should be accompanied by supplementary  material analysing statistical information and details of each fraud so that  the Audit Committee of the Board would have adequate material to contribute  effectively in regard to the punitive or preventive aspects of frauds.
5.2.3 A separate review for the quarter ending March  is not required in view of the Annual Review for the year-ending March  prescribed at para 5.3 below.
5.2.4 Banks are required to constitute a Special  Committee for monitoring  and follow up of cases of frauds involving amounts of
`
100 lakh and above exclusively, while Audit  Committee of the Board (ACB) may continue to monitor all the cases of frauds in  general. The Special Committee should consist of CMD in case of public sector  banks and MD in case of SBI/its Associates. In case of private sector banks,  two members from ACB, two members from Board excluding RBI nominee.
5.2.5 The major functions of the Special  Committee would be to monitor and review all the frauds of
`
100 lakh and above so as to:
Identify  the systemic lacunae if any that facilitated perpetration of the fraud and put  in place measures to plug the same.
Identify  the reasons for delay in detection, if any, reporting to top management of the  bank and RBI.
Monitor  progress of CBI/Police investigation and recovery position.
Ensure  that staff accountability is examined at all levels in all the cases of frauds  and staff side action, if required, is completed quickly without loss of time.
Review  the efficacy of the remedial action taken to prevent recurrence of frauds, such  as strengthening of internal controls.
Put  in place other measures as may be considered relevant to strengthen preventive  measures against frauds.
All the frauds involving an amount of
`
100 lakh and above should be monitored and  reviewed by the Special Committee of the Board in case of all Indian commercial  banks. The periodicity of the meetings of the Special Committee may be decided  according to the number of cases involved. In addition, the Committee should  meet and review as and when a fraud involving an amount of
`
100 lakh and above comes to light.
5.2.6 The banks may delineate in a policy  document the processes for implementation of the Committee's directions and the  document may enable a dedicated outfit of the bank to implement the directions  in this regard.
5.3 Annual  Review of Frauds
5.3.1 Banks should conduct an annual review of the  frauds and place a note before the Board of Directors/Local Advisory Board for  information. The reviews for the year-ended March may be put up to the Board  before the end of the next quarter i.e. quarter ended June 30th. Such  reviews need not be sent to RBI but may be preserved for verification by the  Reserve Bank’s inspecting officers.
5.3.2 The main aspects which may be taken into account  while making such a review may include the following:
Whether the systems in the  bank are adequate to detect frauds, once they have taken place, within the  shortest possible time.
Whether frauds are examined  from staff angle and, wherever necessary, the cases are reported to the  Vigilance Cell for further action in the case of public sector banks.
Whether deterrent punishment  is meted out, wherever warranted, to the persons found responsible.
Whether frauds have taken  place because of laxity in following the systems and procedures and, if so,  whether effective action has been taken to ensure that the systems and  procedures are scrupulously followed by the staff concerned.
Whether  frauds are reported to local Police or CBI, as the case may be, for  investigation, as per the guidelines issued in this regard to public sector  banks by Government of India.
5.3.3 The annual reviews should also, among other  things, include the following details:
Total number of frauds  detected during the year and the amount involved as compared to the previous  two years.
Analysis of frauds according  to different categories detailed in Paragraph 2.1 and also the different  business areas indicated in the Quarterly Report on Frauds Outstanding (vide  FMR – 2).
Modus operandi of major  frauds reported during the year along with their present position.
Detailed analysis of frauds  of
`
1 lakh and above.
Estimated loss to the bank  during the year on account of frauds, amount recovered and provisions made.
Number of cases (with  amounts) where staff are involved and the action taken against staff.
Region-wise/Zone-wise/State-wise  break-up of frauds and amount involved.
Time taken to detect frauds  (number of cases detected within three months, six months and one year of their  taking place).
Position with regard to  frauds reported to CBI/Police.
Number of frauds where final  action has been taken by the bank and cases disposed of.
Preventive/punitive  steps taken by the bank during the year to reduce/minimise the incidence of  frauds.
5.3.4 To align the vigilance function in Private  sector and Foreign Banks to that of the Public Sector Banks the existing  vigilance functions of a few private sector and foreign banks were mapped with  the existing guidelines in the matter and it was observed that the practices  vary widely among the banks. The detailed guidelines for private sector and  foreign banks were issued on May 26, 2011 to address all issues arising out of  lapses in the functioning of the private sector and foreign banks especially  relating to corruption, malpractices, frauds etc. for timely and appropriate  action. The detailed guidelines are aimed at bringing uniformity and  rationalization in the function of internal vigilance. Private sector banks  (including foreign banks operating in India) were advised to put in place a  system of internal vigilance machinery as per the guidelines.
6. GUIDELINES  FOR REPORTING FRAUDS TO POLICE/CBI
6.1 Private sector banks (including foreign  banks operating in India) should follow the following guidelines for reporting  of frauds such as unauthorised credit facilities extended by the bank for  illegal gratification, negligence and cash shortages, cheating, forgery, etc.  to the State Police authorities:
(a) In  dealing with cases of fraud / embezzlement, banks should not merely be actuated  by the necessity of recovering expeditiously the amount involved, but should  also be motivated by public interest and the need for ensuring that the guilty  persons do not go unpunished.
(b) Therefore,  as a general rule, the following cases should invariably be referred to the  State Police:
Cases of fraud involving an amount  of
`
1 lakh and above, committed by  outsiders on their own and/or with the connivance of bank staff/officers.
Cases  of fraud committed by bank employees, when it involves bank funds exceeding
`
10,000/-.
(c) Fraud cases involving amounts of
`
100 lakh and above should also  be reported to the Director, Serious Fraud Investigation Office (SFIO),  Ministry of Company Affairs, Government of India. Second Floor, Paryavaran  Bhavan, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi 110 003. Details of the fraud are to  be reported to SFIO in FMR-1 Format.
6.2 Public sector banks should report fraud cases  involving amount of
`
300  lakh and above to CBI and those below
`
300 lakh to local police, as detailed below:
Cases  to be referred to CBI
(a) Cases  involving
`
300.  lakh and above and upto
`
2500  lakh
Where staff involvement is prima facie  evident – CBI (Anti Corruption Branch)
Where staff involvement is prima facie not  evident – CBI (Economic Offences Wing)
(b) All  cases involving more than
`
2500  lakh – Banking Security and Fraud Cell of the respective centres, which is  specialised cell of the Economic Offences Wing of the CBI for major bank fraud  cases.
Cases  to be referred to Local Police
Cases  below
`
300 lakh – Local Police.
Cases of financial frauds of the value of
`
1 lakh and above, which involve  outsiders and bank staff, should be reported by the Regional Head of the bank  concerned to a senior officer of the State CID/Economic Offences Wing of the  State concerned.
Cases of frauds above
`
10,000/- but below
`
1 lakh should be reported to the local  police station by the bank branch concerned.
All fraud cases of value below
`
10,000/- involving bank officials, should be  referred to the Regional Head of the bank, who would scrutinize each case and  direct the bank branch concerned on whether it should be reported to the local  police station for further legal action.
6.3 Filing of Police complaint in case of  fraudulent encashment of DDs/TTs/Pay Orders/Cheques/ Dividend Warrants, etc.
6.3.1 In case  of frauds involving forged instruments including those cleared under CTS, the  paying banker has to file the police complaint and not the collecting banker.
6.3.2 However, in case of collection of  instrument which is genuine but the amount collected fraudulently by a person  who is not the owner, the collecting  bank which is defrauded has to file a police complaint.
6.3.3 In case  of collection of instruments where the amount has been credited before  realisation and subsequently the instrument is found to be fake/forged and returned  by the paying bank, it is the collecting bank that has to file a police  complaint as they are at loss by paying the amount before realisation of the  instrument.
6.3.4 In cases of collection of altered/fake  cheque involving two or more branches of the same bank, the branch where the  altered/fake instrument has been encashed, should file a Police complaint.
6.3.5 In the event of an altered/fake cheque  having been paid/encashed involving two or more branches of a bank under CBS,  the branch which has released the payment against a fraudulent withdrawal,  should file a Police complaint.
7. REPORTING CASES OF THEFT,  BURGLARY, DACOITY AND BANK ROBBERIES
7.1 Banks  should arrange to report by fax / e-mail instances of bank robberies,  dacoities, thefts and burglaries to the following authorities immediately on  their occurrence.
The  General Manager, Reserve Bank of India, Central Fraud Monitoring  Cell, Department of Banking Supervision, 10/3/8, Nruputhunga Road, P.B. No.  5467 Bengaluru – 560001.
Regional  Office of the Department of Banking Supervision, Reserve Bank of India under  whose jurisdiction the Head Office of the bank falls.
Senior  Supervisory Manager (SSM) in respect of 29 banks in the country under whose  jurisdiction the Head Office of the bank falls, the names of which are given in  Annex.
Regional  Office of Reserve Bank of India, Department of Banking Supervision, Reserve  Bank of India, under whose jurisdiction the affected bank branch is located to  enable the Regional Office to take up the issues regarding security  arrangements in affected branch/es during the State Level Security Meetings  with the concerned authorities (endorsements).
The  Security Adviser, Central Security Cell, Reserve Bank of India, Central Office  Building, Mumbai – 400001.
Ministry  of Finance, Department of Financial Services Government of India, Jeevan Deep,  Parliament Street, New Delhi.-110001.
The report should include details of modus  operandi and other information as at columns 1 to 11 of FMR – 4.
7.2 Banks should also submit to the Reserve  Bank, Department of Banking Supervision, Central Fraud Monitoring Cell at  Bengaluru as well as the concerned Regional Office of the Reserve Bank/SSM  under whose jurisdiction the bank’s Head Office is situated a quarterly  consolidated statement in the format given in FMR – 4 (soft copy) covering all  cases pertaining to the quarter. This may be submitted within 15 days of the  end of the quarter to which it relates.
7.3 Banks which do not have any instances of theft,  burglary, dacoity and / or robbery to report during the quarter, may submit a
nil
report.
Annex
List  of banks under the supervisory purview of Senior Supervisory Managers (SSM):
State Bank of       India.
Bank of Baroda.
Bank of India.
Canara Bank.
Punjab National Bank.
Union Bank of       India
Axis Bank.
HDFC Bank Ltd.
Kotak Mahindra Bank.
ICICI Bank.
Yes Bank Ltd
IndusInd Bank       Ltd
Citi Bank N.A.
HSBC Ltd.
Standard       Chartered Bank.
Deutsche       Bank(Asia)
Credit Agricole       CIB
Bank of America
BNP Paribas
JP Morgan Chase       Bank N.A
Bank of Nova       Scotia
Societe Generale
Royal Bank of       Scotland
Barclays Bank       PLC
DBS Bank
Indian Bank
Federal Bank
ING Vysya Bank
Oriental Bank of Commerce