(298 kb)
Master Circular on Miscellaneous Remittances from India – Facilities for Residents
RBI/2014-15/10
Master Circular No. 6/2014-15
July 1, 2014
(Updated as on November 21, 2014)
To,
All Authorised Persons in Foreign Exchange
Madam / Sir,
Master  Circular on Miscellaneous Remittances from India – Facilities for Residents
Miscellaneous remittance facilities for  residents are allowed in terms of section 5 of the Foreign Exchange Management  Act, 1999, read with Government of India Notification No. G.S.R 381(E) dated  May 3, 2000, as amended from time to time.
2. This
Master Circular
consolidates the  existing instructions on the subject of
"Miscellaneous Remittances from  India - Facilities for Residents"
at one place. The list of underlying  circulars/notifications consolidated in this Master Circular is furnished in  Appendix-1.
3. This  Master Circular is being updated from time to time as and when the fresh  instructions are issued. The date up to which the Master Circular has been  updated is suitably indicated.
4. This Master  Circular may be referred to for general guidance. The Authorised Persons and  the Authorised Dealer Category – I banks may refer to respective circulars/  notifications for detailed information, if so needed.
Yours faithfully,
(B.P. Kanungo)
Principal Chief General Manager
INDEX
A.1
General
A.2
Sale of Exchange
A.3
Medical Treatment
A.4
Cultural Tours
A.5
Private Visits
A.6
Business Visits
A.7
Period of surrender of foreign exchange
A.8
Unspent Foreign Exchange
A.9
Remittances for Tour Arrangements, etc
A.10
Payment in Rupees
A.11
Issue of Guarantee- Import of services
A.12
Liberalised    Remittance Scheme of USD 125,000 for Resident Individuals
A.13
Documentation
A.14
Endorsement on Passport
A.15
International Credit Cards
A.16
International Debit Cards
A.17
Store Value Cards/Charge Cards/Smart Cards, etc
A.18
Redemption of Unutilised balance on prepaid    travel cards
A.19
A.20 Acquisition of foreign securities    under Employees Stock Option (ESOP)
A.20
Income    tax clearance
A.21
Facility to grant loan to NRI/ PIO close relative under    Liberalised Remittance Scheme
Annex 1
FEM CAT Rules
Annex 2
Form A-2
Annex 3
Application cum declaration Form for LRS
Annex 4
Operational Instructions to ADs
Appendix 1
List of Circulars
Appendix 2
Section 5 of FEMA, 1999
Release of Foreign Exchange by Authorised  Dealers
A.1 General
1.1 For release of foreign exchange to  persons resident in India for various current account transactions, Authorised  Dealer banks are to be guided by the Rules made by the Government of India  under Section 5 of the Foreign Exchange
1A
Management Act, 1999
(as indicated in item 1  of Appendix 2)
which are detailed in the Foreign Exchange Management  (Current Account Transactions) Rules, 2000 (hereinafter referred to as the  Rules) notified by the Government of  India vide Notification No. G.S.R.381 (E) dated 3rd May 2000 (Annex-1)  -. In terms of the said Rules, drawal of foreign exchange for certain  categories of transactions as listed in Schedule I is expressly prohibited.  Exchange facilities for transactions included in Schedule II to the Rules may  be permitted by the Authorised Dealer banks provided the applicant has secured  the approval from the Ministry/Department of the Government of India as  specified therein. In respect of transactions included in Schedule III, prior  approval of the Reserve Bank would be required for remittance exceeding the  specified limits. The release of foreign exchange up to the threshold ceilings  specified in Schedule III stands delegated to the Authorised Dealer banks. All  applications for release of foreign exchange exceeding the limits as prescribed  in Schedule III to the Rules should be referred to the Regional Office  concerned of the Foreign Exchange Department of the Reserve Bank, under whose  jurisdiction the applicant is functioning / residing.
1
1.2 “Drawal”  of foreign exchange also includes use of International Credit Cards (ICC),  International Debit Cards (IDC), ATM cards, etc.
2
“Currency”, interalia, includes ICC, IDC and ATM Cards. Accordingly, all  Rules, Regulations made and Directions issued under the Act apply to the use of  ICC, IDC and ATM Cards.
1.3 In  order to provide adequate foreign exchange facilities and efficient customer  service, the Reserve Bank has decided to grant licences to certain entities by  authorising them as Authorised Dealer – Category II to undertake a range of  non-
2A
trade  current account transactions. Accordingly, Authorised Dealer – Category II are  authorised to release / remit foreign exchange for the following non-trade  current account transactions:
(a) Private visits,
(b) Remittance  by tour operators / travel agents to overseas agents / principals / hotels,
(c) Business travel,
(d) Fee for participation in global  conferences and specialized training,
(e) Remittance  for participation in international events / competitions (towards  training, sponsorship and prize money),
(f) Film shooting,
(g) Medical treatment abroad,
(h) Disbursement of crew wages,
(i) Overseas education,
(j) Remittance under educational tie up  arrangements with universities abroad,
(k) Remittance  towards fees for examinations held in India and abroad and additional score  sheets for GRE, TOEFL, etc.
(l) Employment and processing, assessment  fees for overseas job applications,
(m) Emigration and emigration consultancy  fees,
(n) Skills / credential assessment fees for  intending migrants,
(o) Visa fees,
(p) Processing  fees for registration of documents as required by the Portuguese / other  Governments,
(q) registration / subscription / membership fees to International  Organisations.
1.4 Release  of foreign exchange is not admissible for travel to and transaction with  residents of Nepal and Bhutan. (cf. Clause (b) of Rule 3 of the Rules
(as  indicated in item 2 of Appendix
3
).
A.2 Sale of Exchange
3A
2.1 Authorised Persons may release foreign  exchange for
travel purposes
on the basis of a declaration given by the  traveller regarding the amount of foreign exchange availed of during the  financial year.
3B
2.2 In case of issue of travellers  cheques, the traveller should sign the cheques in the presence of an authorised  official and the purchaser’s acknowledgement for receipt of the travellers  cheques should be held on record.
2.3
4
Out  of the overall foreign exchange being sold to a traveller, exchange in the form  of foreign currency notes and coins may be sold up to the limit indicated  below:
(i) Travellers proceeding to countries other than Iraq,  Libya, Islamic Republic of Iran, Russian Federation and other Republics of  Commonwealth of Independent States - not exceeding USD 3000 or its equivalent.
(ii) Travellers  proceeding to Iraq or Libya - not exceeding USD 5000 or its equivalent
(iii) Travellers  proceeding to Islamic Republic of Iran, Russian Federation and other Republics  of Commonwealth of Independent States - full exchange may be released.
5
(iv) Travellers  proceeding for Haj/Umrah pilgrimage - full  amount of BTQ entitlement in cash or up to the cash limit as specified by the  Haj Committee of India, may be released.
2.4
4A
The form A2 relating to  sale of foreign exchange should be retained for a period of one year by the Authorised Persons, together  with the related documents, for the purpose of verification by their Internal  Auditors.
6
However,  in respect of remittance applications for miscellaneous non-trade current  account transactions of amount not exceeding USD 25,000, Authorised Dealers may  obtain
simplified Application-cum-Declaration
form (Form A2) as shown at
Annex -2.
2.5 In  cases where the remittances are allowed on the basis of self declaration, the  onus of furnishing the correct details in the application will remain with the  applicant who has certified the details relating to the purpose of such  remittance.
A.3 Medical Treatment
7
3.1 With a view to enable residents to avail of  foreign exchange for medical treatment abroad without any hassles and any loss  of time, Authorised Dealers may release foreign exchange up to an amount of USD  100,000 or its equivalent, on the
8
basis of self declaration that the applicant is buying  exchange for medical treatment outside India, without insisting on any estimate  from a hospital/doctor.
7A
3.2 For amount exceeding the above limit,  estimate from the doctor in India or hospital/ doctor abroad, is required to be  submitted to the Authorised Dealers.
7B
3.3 A person who has fallen sick after proceeding  abroad may also be released foreign exchange by an Authorised Dealer for  medical treatment outside India.
A.4 Cultural Tours
9
Dance troupes, artistes, etc., who wish to undertake  tours abroad for cultural purposes should apply to the Ministry of Human  Resources Development (Department of Education and Culture), Government of  India, for their foreign exchange requirements. Authorised Dealers may release  foreign exchange, on the strength of the sanction from the Ministry concerned,  to the extent and subject to conditions indicated therein.
A.5 Private Visits
10
Foreign exchange for private visit can also be  released to a person who is availing of foreign exchange for travel outside  India for any purpose up to the limits specified in Schedule III to the Rules.
A.6 Business Visits
11
Foreign exchange may be released for undertaking  business travel or attending a conference or specialised training or for  maintenance expenses of a patient going abroad for medical treatment or check  up abroad or for accompanying as attendant to a patient going abroad for  medical treatment / check up to the limits specified in Schedule III to the  Rules.
A.7 Period of surrender of foreign exchange
12
7.1 In case  the foreign exchange purchased for a specific purpose is not utilized for that  purpose, it could be utilized for any other eligible purpose for which drawal  of foreign exchange is permitted under the relevant Rules / Regulation.
13
7.2 General  permission is available to any resident individual to surrender received /  realised / unspent / unused foreign exchange to an Authorised Person within a  period of 180 days from the date of receipt / realisation / purchase /  acquisition / date of return of the traveller, as the case may be.
14
7.3 The  liberalized uniform time limit of 180 days is applicable only to resident  individuals and in areas other than export of goods and services.
15
7.4 In all  other cases, the regulations / directions on surrender requirement shall remain  unchanged. (cf.
Notification No. FEMA 9/2000-RB dated May 3,  2000
, as amended from time to time).
A.8 Unspent Foreign Exchange
16
8.1 As stated  above, unspent foreign exchange brought back to India by a resident individual  should be surrendered to an Authorised Person within 180 days from the date of  return of the traveller. Exchange so brought back can be utilized by  the individual for his/her subsequent visit abroad.
8.2 However,  a returning traveller is permitted to retain with him, foreign currency  travellers cheques and currency notes up to an aggregate amount of USD 2000 and  foreign coins without any ceiling beyond 180 days. (cf.
Notification No. FEMA 11/2000-RB dated May  3, 2000
). Foreign exchange so retained, can be utilized by the  traveller for his subsequent visit abroad.
17
8.3 A person  resident in India can open, hold and maintain with an Authorised Dealer in  India, a
Resident Foreign Currency (Domestic) Account
, out of foreign  exchange acquired in the form of currency notes, bank notes and travellers  cheques from any of the sources like, payment for services rendered abroad, as  honorarium, gift, services rendered or in settlement of any lawful obligation  from any person not resident in India.
8.4 The  account may also be opened/ credited with foreign exchange earned abroad,  including proceeds of export of goods and/ or services, royalty, honorarium,  etc., and/or gifts received from close relatives (as defined in the Indian  Companies Act1956) and repatriated to India through normal banking channels by  resident individuals.
18
8.5 The  eligible credits to the Resident Foreign Currency (Domestic) Account, out of  foreign exchange acquired in the form of currency notes, bank notes and  travellers cheques, are as under :-
(i) acquired  by him from an Authorised Person for travel abroad and represents the unspent  amount thereof or
(ii) acquired  by him, while on a visit to any place outside India, by way of payment for  services not arising from any business in or anything done in India and by way  of honorarium or gift or
(iii) acquired  by him, from any person not resident in India, and who is on a visit to India,  as honorarium, gift, for services rendered or in settlement of any lawful  obligation.
17A
Note: Where  a person approaches an Authorised Person for surrender of unspent/ unutilized  foreign exchange after the prescribed period of 180 days, Authorised Person  should not refuse to purchase the foreign exchange merely on the ground that  the prescribed period has expired.
A.9 Remittances for Tour Arrangements, etc.
17B
9.1 Authorised Dealers may remit foreign exchange  up to a reasonable limit, at the request of a traveller towards his hotel  accommodation, tour arrangements, etc., in the countries proposed to be visited  by him or for making other tour arrangements for travellers from India,  provided in each case the Authorised Dealer is satisfied that the remittance is  being made out of the foreign exchange purchased by the traveller concerned  from an Authorised Person (including exchange drawn for private travel abroad),  in accordance with the Rules, Regulations and Directions in force.
9.2 Authorised  Dealers may effect remittances at the request of agents in India who have  tie-up arrangements with hotels/ agents, etc., abroad for providing hotel  accommodation or making other tour arrangements for travel from India, provided  the Authorised Dealer is satisfied that the remittance is being made out of the  foreign exchange purchased by the traveller concerned from an Authorised Person  (including exchange drawn for private travel abroad) in accordance with the  Rules, Regulations and Directions in force.
9.3 Authorised  Dealer may open foreign currency accounts in the name of agents in India who  have tie up arrangements with hotels/ agents, etc., abroad for providing  hotel accommodation or making other tour arrangements for travellers from  India provided:-
a) the credits to the account are by way  of depositing
i)  collections made in foreign exchange from travellers; and
ii) refunds received from outside India on account of  cancellation of bookings / tour arrangements, etc., and
b) the  debits in foreign exchange are for making payments towards hotel accommodation,  tour arrangements, etc., outside India, in accordance with paragraph 9.2 above.
17C
9.4 Authorised Dealer may allow tour  operators to remit the cost of rail/ road/ water/- transportation charges  outside India without any prior approval from the Reserve Bank, net of  commission/ mark up due to the agent. The sale of passes/ ticket in India can  be made either against the payment in Indian Rupees or in foreign exchange  released for visits abroad. The cost of passes/tickets collected in Indian  Rupees need not be adjusted in the travellers’ entitlement of foreign exchange  for private visit.
17D
9.5 In respect of consolidated tours arranged by  travel agents in India for foreign tourists visiting India and neighbouring  countries like Nepal, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, etc., against advance payments/  reimbursement through an Authorised Dealer, part of the foreign exchange received in India against such  consolidated tour arrangement, may require to be remitted from India to these  neighbouring countries for services rendered by travel agents and hoteliers in  these countries. Authorised Dealer may allow such remittances after verifying  that the amount being remitted to the neighbouring countries (inclusive of  remittances, if any, already made against the tour) does not exceed the amount  actually remitted to India and the country of residence of the beneficiary is  not Pakistan.
17E
A.10  Payment in Rupees
Authorised Dealers may accept payment in cash up  to Rs. 50,000 (Rupees fifty thousand only) against sale of foreign exchange for  travel abroad (for private visit or for any other purpose). Wherever the sale  of foreign exchange exceeds the amount equivalent to Rs.50,000, the payment  must be received only by:
a crossed cheque drawn on the applicant’s bank  account, or
crossed cheque drawn on the bank account of the firm/ company sponsoring the visit of the applicant, or
Banker’s Cheque- /- Pay Order- /- Demand Draft  or
Debit / credit / prepaid cards provided
a)  KYC/AML guidelines are complied with
b)  sale of foreign currency- /- issue of foreign currency TCs is within the limits  (credit- /- prepaid cards) prescribed by the bank and
c) the purchaser of foreign currency- /- foreign  currency TCs and the credit/debit/prepaid card holder is one and the same  person.
17F
Note: Where  the rupee equivalent of foreign exchange drawn exceeds Rs 50,000 either for any  single drawal or more than one drawal reckoned together for a single  journey/visit, it should be paid by cheque or draft.
19
A.11  Issue of Guarantee – Import of services
With a view to  further liberalise the procedure (other than in respect of a Public Sector  Company or a Department/ Undertaking of the Government of India/ State  Governments) for import of services, it has been decided to increase the limit  for issue of guarantee by AD Category-I Banks from USD 100,000 to USD 500,000.
Accordingly, AD Category-I banks are now permitted to issue guarantee  for amount not exceeding USD 500,000 or its equivalent in favour of a  non-resident service provider, on behalf of a resident customer who is a  service importer, provided:
(a) the AD Category-I bank  is satisfied about the bonafides of the transaction;
(b) the AD Category-I bank  ensures submission of documentary evidence for import of services in the normal  course; and
(c)  the guarantee is to secure a direct contractual liability arising out of a  contract between a resident and a non-resident.
In the case of a  Public Sector Company or a Department/ Undertaking of the Government of India/  State Governments, approval from the Ministry of Finance, Government of India  for issue of guarantee for an amount exceeding USD 100,000 (USD One hundred  thousand) or its equivalent would be required.
In case of invocation of the guarantee, the  Authorised Dealer is required to submit to the Chief General Manager-in-Charge,  Foreign Exchange Department, Foreign Investments Division (EPD), Reserve Bank  of India, Central Office, Mumbai- 400001 a report on the circumstances leading  to the invocation of the guarantee.
20
A.12  Liberalised Remittance Scheme (LRS) of USD 125,000 for Resident individuals
12.1 Under  the Liberalised Remittance Scheme, (hereinafter referred to as the Scheme) Authorised  Dealers may freely allow remittances by resident individuals up to USD 125,000  per financial year (April-March) for any permitted current or capital account  transactions or a combination of both.
19A
12.2 The Scheme is available to all  resident individuals including minors. In case of remitter being a minor, the LRS declaration form should be  countersigned by the minor’s natural guardian.
19B
12.3 Remittances under the Scheme  can be consolidated in respect of family members subject to individual family  members complying with its terms and conditions.
12.4 Remittances  under the Scheme are allowed only in respect of permissible current or capital  account transactions or a combination of both. All other transactions which are  otherwise not permissible under FEMA and those in the nature of remittance for  margins or margin calls to overseas exchanges/ overseas counterparty are not  allowed under the Scheme.
19D
12.5 Under the Scheme, Resident individuals are  free to acquire and hold shares or debt instruments or any other asset
21
including immovable property outside India
22
without  prior approval of the Reserve Bank.
12.6 The  limit of USD 125,000 under the Scheme also includes remittances towards gift  and donation by a resident individual.
19C
12.7 Remittances under the Scheme can be  used for purchasing objects of art subject to the provisions of other  applicable laws such as the extant Foreign Trade Policy of the Government of  India.
12.8 The  Scheme can also be used for remittance of funds for acquisition of ESOPs. The  Scheme is in addition to acquisition of ESOPs linked to ADR / GDR and  acquisition of qualification shares.
12.9 A resident individual is permitted to make  a rupee gift/ loan to a NRI /PIO who is a close relative of the resident  individual [close relative as defined in Section 6 of the Indian Companies Act,  1956]. The gift/ loan amount should be  within the overall limit of USD 125,000 per financial year as permitted under  the Liberalised Remittance Scheme (LRS) for a resident individual. It would be  the responsibility of the resident donor/lender to ensure that the gift/ loan  amount is under the LRS and all the remittances under the LRS during the  financial year including the gift/ loan amount have not exceeded the limit  prescribed under the LRS. It may be observed that only LRS limit of the  remitter would be utilized and gift/loan amount as the case may be would actually  be credited to NRO A/c. of NRI/ PIO close relative.
12.10 A resident individual can invest in units  of Mutual Funds, Venture Capital Funds, unrated debt securities, promissory  notes, etc. under this Scheme. Further, the resident can invest in such  securities out of the bank account opened abroad under the Scheme (see 12.13).
12.11 An  individual who has availed of a loan abroad while as a non-resident can repay  the same on return to India under the Scheme as a resident.
12.12 The  Scheme can be used for outward remittance in the form of a DD either in the  resident individual’s own name or in the name of beneficiary with whom he  intends putting through the permissible transactions at the time of private  visit abroad, against self-declaration of the remitter in the format  prescribed.
19D
12.12A  With effect from August 05, 2013, this Scheme,  can be used by Resident individuals to set up Joint Ventures (JV)/ Wholly Owned  Subsidiaries (WOS) outside India for bonafides business activities within the  limit of USD 125,000 subject to the terms & conditions stipulated in
FEMA  Notification No.263
.
12.13 Individuals can also open, maintain and  hold foreign currency accounts with a bank outside India for making remittances  under the Scheme without prior approval the Reserve Bank. The foreign currency  accounts may be used for putting through all transactions connected with or  arising from remittances eligible under this Scheme.
12.14 Banks should not extend any kind of credit  facilities to resident individuals to facilitate remittances under the Scheme.
12.15 The  scheme is not available for remittances for any purpose specifically prohibited  under Schedule I or any item restricted under Schedule II of Foreign Exchange  Management (Current Account Transaction) Rules, 2000.
12.16 The facility is not available for making  remittances directly or indirectly to Bhutan, Nepal, Mauritius and Pakistan.
12.17 The Scheme is not available for remittance  to countries identified by Financial Action Task Force (FATF) as non-co-operative  countries and territories as available on FATF website
www.fatf-gafi.org
. or as notified by the Reserve Bank.
12.18 For undertaking transactions under the  Scheme, resident individuals may use the application-cum-Declaration Form as at
Annex-3 and it is mandatory to have PAN number to make remittances under the  Scheme.
12.19 Investor, who  has remitted funds under LRS can retain, reinvest the income earned on the investments.
23
12.20 AD Category – I banks are required to furnish  the information on remittances made under this scheme on a monthly basis, on or  before the fifth of the following month to which it relates through Online  Returns Filing System (ORFS) for which purpose they have been given user ID and  password by the Reserve Bank.
Where there is no data to furnish, AD banks are  advised to upload ‘nil’ figures in the ORFS system.
24
A.13  Documentation
13.1 The  Reserve Bank will not, generally, prescribe the documents which should be  verified by the Authorised Dealers while releasing foreign exchange. In this  connection, attention of authorized dealers is drawn to sub-section (5) of  Section 10 of the FEMA, 1999
(as indicated in item 3 of Appendix 2)
which provides that an authorised person shall require any person
desiring
to transact in foreign exchange to make such a declaration and to give such  information as will reasonably satisfy him that the transaction will not  involve and is not designed for the purpose of any contravention or evasion of  the provisions of the FEMA or any rule, regulation, notification, direction or  order issued there under.
13.2 Authorised  Dealers are also required to keep on record any information /  documentation, on the basis of which the transaction was undertaken, for  verification by the Reserve Bank. In case the applicant refuses to comply with  any such requirement or makes unsatisfactory compliance therewith, the  Authorised Dealer shall refuse, in writing, to undertake the transaction  and shall, if he has reasons to believe that any contravention / evasion is  contemplated by the person, report the matter to the Reserve Bank.
13.3 Authorised  Dealers have specifically been advised that they may release foreign exchange  up to USD 100,000 each for employment, emigration, maintenance of close  relatives, education and medical treatment abroad without insisting on any  supporting documents but on the basis of self-declaration incorporating certain  basic details of the transactions and submission of Form A2. In addition, the  existing facility of release of exchange by Authorised Persons up to USD 10,000  or its equivalent in one financial year for one or more private visits to any  country (except Nepal and Bhutan) will continue to be available on a self-declaration  basis.
25
A.14  Endorsement on Passport
It is not mandatory for Authorised Dealers to  endorse the amount of foreign exchange sold for travel abroad on the  passport of the traveller. However, if requested by the traveller, they may  record under their stamp, date, signature and details of foreign exchange sold  for travel.
A.15 International Credit Cards
26
15.1 The  restrictions contained in Rule 5 of the Foreign Exchange Management (Current  Account Transactions) Rules, 2000 will not be applicable for use of  International Credit Cards (ICCs) by residents for making payment towards  expenses, while on a visit outside India.
15.2 Residents  can use ICCs on internet for any purpose for which exchange can be purchased  from an Authorised Dealer in India, e.g. for import of books, purchase of downloadable software or import of any other item permissible under Foreign  Trade Policy (FTP).
15.3  ICCs  cannot be used on internet or otherwise for purchase of prohibited items, like  lottery tickets, banned or proscribed magazines, participation in sweepstakes,  payment for call-back services, etc., since no drawal of foreign exchange is  permitted for such items/activities.
15.4  There  is no aggregate monetary ceiling separately prescribed for use of ICCs through  internet.
27
15.5 Resident individuals maintaining foreign  currency accounts with an Authorised Dealer in India or a bank abroad, as  permissible under extant Foreign Exchange Regulations, are free to obtain ICCs  issued by overseas banks and other reputed agencies. The charges incurred  against the card either in India or abroad, can be met out of funds held in  such foreign currency account/s of the card holder or through remittances, if  any, from India only through a bank where the card holder has a current or  savings account. The remittance for this purpose should also be made directly  to the card issuing agency abroad, and not to a third party.
15.6 The applicable limit will be the credit  limit fixed by the card issuing banks. There is no monetary ceiling fixed by  the Reserve Bank for remittances, if any, under this facility.
23A
15.7  Use of ICC for payment in foreign exchange in Nepal and Bhutan is not  permitted.
A.16 International Debit Cards
28
16.1  Banks  authorised to deal in foreign exchange are issuing International Debit Cards  (IDCs) which can be used by a resident for drawing cash or making payment to a  merchant establishment overseas during his visit abroad. It is clarified that  IDCs can be used only for permissible current account transactions and the  item-wise limits as mentioned in the Schedules to the Rules, as amended from  time to time, are equally applicable to payments made through use of these  cards.
16.2 The IDCs cannot be used on internet for  purchase of prohibited items like lottery tickets, banned or proscribed  magazines, participation in sweepstakes, payment for call-back services, etc.,  i.e. for such items/activities for which drawal of foreign exchange is not  permitted.
16.3 The  International Banking Divisions/Foreign Exchange Departments of AD banks were  required to submit a statement as on December 31, each year in the prescribed  proforma, in case the aggregate forex utilization by the IDC holders exceeds  USD 100,000 in a calendar year. The requirement of submission of the above  statement by the AD banks has been discontinued from the calendar year 2010  onwards.
A.17 Store Value  Cards/ Charge Cards/ Smart Cards, etc.
29
Certain Authorised Dealer banks are also issuing Store  Value Card/ Charge Card/ Smart Card to residents traveling on private/business visit  abroad which are used for making payments at overseas merchant establishments  and also for drawing cash from ATM terminals. No prior permission from the  Reserve Bank is required for issue of such cards. However, the use of such  cards is limited to permissible current account transactions and subject to the  prescribed limits under the Rules, as amended from time to time.
A.18 Redemption of unutilized balance on prepaid  travel cards:
As per the practice  followed by issuers, resident Indians who purchase their travel cards, are  permitted refund of the unutilized foreign exchange balance only after 10 days  from the date of last transaction and accordingly, this condition is stated in  the “user guide”. Since these cards are expected to act as substitutes for  cash/ Travellers Cheques, the facilities available to the user will have to be  similar. Accordingly, all such Authorised Persons shall redeem the unutilized  balance outstanding in the cards immediately upon request by the resident  Indians to whom the cards are issued subject to retention of: -
The  amounts that are authorized and remain unclaimed/ not settled by the acquirers  as of the date of redemption till the completion of the respective settlement  cycle;
A  small balance not exceeding US$ 100, for meeting any pipeline transactions till  the completion of the respective settlement cycle; and
Transaction  fees / service tax payable in India in Rupees.
For the amount that are authorized but  unclaimed/ not settled by the acquirer, the issuer of such cards can hold such  amounts until such transactions are processed/ settled by the acquirers within  the prescribed settlement timeframe.
A.19 Acquisition of foreign securities under Employees Stock Option (ESOP)
30
A   person resident in India, being an individual, who is an employee or a   director of Indian office or branch of a foreign entity or of a   subsidiary in India of a foreign entity or of an Indian company in which   foreign entity has direct or indirect equity holding, may accept the   shares offered by such foreign entity provided that (i) the shares under   the ESOP Scheme are offered by the  issuing foreign entity globally on   uniform basis and (ii) an Annual Return is submitted by the Indian   company to the Reserve Bank through the Authorised Dealer bank giving   details of remittances / beneficiaries etc.
They are also permitted to freely sell the shares, provided the proceeds thereof are repatriated to India immediately on receipt thereof and in any case not later than 90 days from the date of sale.
A.20 Income- tax clearance
Remittances to  non-residents will be allowed to be made by the Authorised Dealers on  production of an undertaking by the remitter and a Certificate from a Chartered  Accountant in the formats prescribed by the Central Board of Direct Taxes,  Ministry of Finance, Government of India.
A.21 Facility to grant loan to NRI/ PIO close relative  under Liberalised Remittance Scheme (LRS):
Resident individual  is permitted to lend to a Non-resident Indian (NRI)/ Person of Indian Origin  (PIO) close relative [means relative as defined in Section 6 of the Companies  Act, 1956] by way of crossed cheque/ electronic transfer subject to the  following conditions:
(i) the  loan is free of interest and the minimum maturity of the loan is one year;
(ii) the  loan amount should be within the overall limit under the Liberalised Remittance  Scheme of USD 125,000 per financial year available for a resident individual.  It would be the responsibility of the lender to ensure that the amount of loan  is within the Liberalised Remittance Scheme limit of USD 125,000 during the financial year;
(iii) the loan shall be utilized for meeting the  borrower’s personal requirements or for his own business purposes in India.
(iv) the loan  shall not be utilized, either singly or in association with other person for  any of the activities in which investment by persons resident outside India is  prohibited, namely:
The business of chit fund,  or
Nidhi Company, or
Agricultural or plantation  activities or in real estate business, or construction of farm houses, or
trading in Transferable Development Rights  (TDRs)
Explanation: For the purpose of item (c) above, real estate  business shall not include development of townships, construction of  residential/ commercial premises, roads or bridges.
(v) the  loan amount should be credited to the NRO a/c of the NRI / PIO. Credit of such  loan amount may be treated as an eligible credit to NRO a/c;
(vi) the loan amount shall not be remitted outside  India; and
(vii) repayment of loan shall be made by way of inward  remittances through normal banking channels or by debit to the Non-resident  Ordinary (NRO) / Non-resident External (NRE) / Foreign Currency Non-resident  (FCNR) account of the borrower or out of the sale proceeds of the shares or  securities or immovable property against which such loan was granted.
Annex-1
(Para A. 1.1 of Master Circular)
Foreign Exchange Management (Current Account  Transactions) Rules, 2000
Notification  No. G.S.R.381(E) dated 3rd May 2000 (as amended from time to time)*:
In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 5  and sub-section (1) and clause (a) of sub-section (2) of Section 46 of the  Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999, and in consultation with the Reserve  Bank, the Central Government having considered it necessary in the public  interest, makes the following rules, namely:--
1. Short title  and commencement
.---(1) These rules may be called the Foreign Exchange  Management (Current Account Transactions) Rules, 2000;
(2) They shall come into effect on the 1st day of June  2000.
2. Definitions---In these rules, unless the  context otherwise requires:
(a) “Act”  means the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999);
(b) “Drawal”  means drawal of foreign exchange from an authorised person and includes opening  of Letter of Credit or use of International Credit Card or International Debit  Card or ATM Card or any other thing by whatever name called which has the  effect of creating foreign exchange liability;
(c) “Schedule”  means a schedule appended to these rules;
(d) The words and expressions not defined in these  rules but defined in the Act shall have the same meanings respectively assigned  to them in the Act.
3. Prohibition on drawal of Foreign Exchange
---Drawal of foreign exchange by any person for the  following purpose is prohibited, namely:
a. a  transaction specified in the Schedule I; or
b. a travel to  Nepal and/or Bhutan; or
c. a  transaction with a person resident in Nepal or Bhutan.
Provided that the prohibition in clause (c) may be  exempted by RBI subject to such terms and conditions as it may consider  necessary to stipulate by special or general order.
4. Prior  approval of Government of India
- No person shall draw foreign exchange for a  transaction included in the Schedule II without prior approval of the  Government of India;
Provided that this Rule shall not apply where the  payment is made out of funds held in Resident Foreign Currency (RFC) Account of  the remitter.
5. Prior approval of Reserve Bank
No person shall draw foreign exchange for a  transaction included in the Schedule III without prior approval of the Reserve  Bank;
Provided that this Rule shall not apply where  the payment is made out of funds held in Resident Foreign Currency (RFC)  Account of the remitter.
6.
(1)  Nothing contained in Rule 4 or Rule 5 shall apply to drawal made out of funds  held in Exchange Earners’ Foreign Currency (EEFC) account of the remitter.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in  sub-rule (1), restrictions imposed under rule 4 or rule 5 shall continue to  apply where the drawal of foreign exchange from the Exchange Earners Foreign  Currency (EEFC) Account is for the purpose specified in items 10 and 11 of  Schedule II, or item 3, 4, 11, 16 & 17 of Schedule III as the case may be.
7. Use of International Credit Card while  outside India
Nothing contained in Rule 5 shall apply to the  use of International Credit Card for making payment by a person towards meeting  expenses while such person is on a visit outside India.
Schedule I
Transactions which are Prohibited (see rule 3)
1. Remittance out of lottery winnings.
2. Remittance of income from racing/riding etc. or any  other hobby.
3. Remittance for purchase of lottery tickets, banned  /proscribed magazines, football  pools, sweepstakes, etc.
4. Payment of commission on exports made towards  equity investment in Joint Ventures / Wholly Owned Subsidiaries abroad of  Indian companies.
5. Remittance of dividend by any company to which the  requirement of dividend balancing is applicable.
6. Payment of commission on exports under Rupee State  Credit Route, except commission up to 10% of invoice value of exports of tea  and tobacco.
7. Payment related to "Call Back Services"  of telephones.
8. Remittance of interest income on funds held in  Non-Resident Special Rupee (Account) Scheme.
Schedule II
Transactions which require prior approval of the  Central Government
(see Rule 4)
Purpose of Remittance
Ministry / Department of Govt. of    India whose approval is required
1. Cultural    Tours
Ministry of Human    Resources Development, (Department of Education and Culture)
2.    Advertisement in foreign print media for the purposes other than promotion of    tourism, foreign investments and international bidding (exceeding USD 10,000)    by a State Government and its Public Sector Undertakings
Ministry of    Finance, (Department of Economic Affairs)
3. Remittance    of freight of vessel chartered by a PSU
Ministry of    Surface Transport, (Chartering Wing)
4. Payment of    import through ocean transport by a Govt. Department or a PSU on c.i.f. basis    (i.e. other than f.o.b. and f.a.s. basis)
Ministry of    Surface Transport, (Chartering Wing)
5.    Multi-modal transport operators making remittance to their agents abroad
Registration    Certificate from the Director General of Shipping
6. Remittance    of hiring charges of transponders by
(a) TV    Channels
(b) Internet    Service providers
Ministry of    Information and Broadcasting
Ministry of    Communication and Information Technology
7. Remittance    of container detention charges exceeding the rate prescribed by Director    General of Shipping
Ministry of    Surface Transport (Director General of Shipping)
8. omitted
9. Remittance    of prize money/sponsorship of sports activity abroad by a person other than    International / National / State Level sports bodies, if the amount involved    exceeds USD 100,000.
Ministry of    Human Resources Development (Department of Youth Affairs and Sports)
10. Omitted
11.    Remittance for membership of P&I Club
Ministry of    Finance (Insurance Division)
Schedule III
(See  Rule 5)
1.  Omitted
2. Release of exchange exceeding US$ 10,000 or its equivalent in one  financial year, for one or more private visits to any country (except Nepal and  Bhutan).
3. Gift remittance exceeding US$ 5,000 per financial year per remitter  or donor other than resident individual
4. (i) Donation exceeding  US$ 5000 per financial year per remitter or donor other than resident  individual
(ii)  Donations by Corporate, exceeding one per cent of their foreign exchange  earnings during the previous three financial years or US$ 5,000,000, whichever  is less, for:-
(a) creation of Chairs in reputed educational institutes,
(b) to funds (not being an investment fund) promoted by educational  institutes; and
(c) to a technical institution or body or association in the field of  activity of the donor Company
Explanation: For the purpose of the item numbers  3 and 4, remittance of gift and donation by resident individuals are subsumed  under the Liberalised Remittance Scheme.
5.  Exchange facilities exceeding USD 100,000 for persons going abroad for  employment.
6.  Exchange facilities for emigration exceeding USD 100,000 or amount prescribed  by country of emigration.
7.  Remittance for maintenance of close relatives abroad,@@
i. exceeding net salary (after deduction of taxes, contribution to  provident fund and other deductions) of a person who is resident but not  permanently resident in India and –
(a) is a citizen of a foreign State other than Pakistan; or
(b) is a citizen of India,  who is on deputation to the office or branch or subsidiary or joint venture in  India of such foreign company.
ii.  exceeding USD 100,000 per year, per recipient, in all other cases.
Explanation: For the purpose of  this item, a person resident in India on account of his employment or  deputation of a specified duration (irrespective of length thereof) or for a  specific job or assignments, the duration of which does not exceed three years,  is a resident but not permanently resident.
8. Release of foreign exchange, exceeding USD 25,000 to a person,  irrespective of period of stay, for  business travel, or attending a conference or specialised training or for  maintenance expenses of a patient going abroad for medical treatment or  check-up abroad, or for accompanying as attendant to a patient going abroad for  medical treatment/check-up.
9.  Release of exchange for meeting expenses for medical treatment abroad exceeding  the estimate from the doctor in India or hospital/doctor abroad.
10.  Release of exchange for studies abroad exceeding the estimate from the  institution abroad or USD 100,000, per academic year, whichever is higher.
11.  Commission, per transaction, to agents abroad for sale of residential flats or  commercial plots in India exceeding USD 25,000 or 5% of the inward remittance  whichever is more.
12.  Omitted
13.  Omitted
14.  Omitted
15.  Remittances exceeding US$ 10,000,000 per project for any consultancy services  in respect of infrastructure projects and US$ 1,000,000 per project, for other  consultancy services procured from outside India.
Explanation:- For the purposes of this  item number 'infrastructure project'
is those related to –
(i) Power,
(ii) Telecommunication,
(iii) Railways,
(iv) Roads including bridges,
(v) Sea port and air port,
(vi) Industrial parks, and
(vii)  Urban Infrastructure (water supply, sanitation and sewage)
16.  Omitted
17.  Remittances exceeding five per cent of investment brought into India or US$  1,00,000 whichever is higher, by an entity in India by way of reimbursement of  pre-incorporation expenses.
18.  Omitted
(Amendments)
Notification GSR.663 (E) dated August 17, 2000,
S.O.301(E) dated March 30, 2001,
GSR.442(E) dated November 2, 2002,
GSR.831(E) dated December 20, 2002,
GSR.33(E) dated January 16, 2003,
GSR.397(E) dated May 14, 2003,
GSR.731(E) dated September 11, 2003,
GSR.849(E) dated October 29, 2003,
GSR.608(E) dated September 13, 2004,
G.S.R.512(E) dated July 28,2005,
G.S.R.412(E) dated July 11, 2006,
G.S.R.511(E) dated July 28, 2006,
G.S.R.349 (E) dated May 22, 2009 and
G.S.R.382 (E) dated May 05,  2010.
G.S.R  No.488 (E) dated July 11, 2014
Please Note:-
@@  May be read with
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.26 dated  January 14, 2010
.
Annex-4
Operational  Instructions for Authorised Dealer Banks
Master  Circular on Miscellaneous Remittances from India – Facilities for Residents
1. General
Authorised  Dealers may carefully study the provisions of the Act / Regulations /  Notifications issued under Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999.
Reserve Bank will not prescribe the documents which  should be verified by the Authorised Dealers while permitting remittances for  various transactions, particularly of current account.
In terms of the provisions contained in  sub-section 5 of section 10 of the Act, before undertaking any transaction in  foreign exchange on behalf of any person, an Authorised Dealer is required to  obtain a declaration and such other information from the person (applicant) on  whose behalf the transaction is being undertaken that will reasonably satisfy  him that the transaction is not designed to contravene or evade the provisions  of the Act or any of the Rules or Regulations made or Notifications or  directions or orders issued under the Act. Authorised Dealers should preserve  the information / documents obtained by them from the applicant before  undertaking the transactions for verification by the Reserve Bank.
In case the person on whose behalf the  transaction is being undertaken refuses or does not give satisfactory  compliance of the requirements of an authorised person, he shall refuse in  writing to undertake the transactions. Where an authorized person has reasons  to believe that a contravention or evasion of the Act or the Rules or  Regulations made or Notifications issued there under was contemplated in the  transaction that he has refused to undertake, he shall report the matter to the  Reserve Bank.
With a view to maintaining uniform practices,  Authorized Dealers may consider requirements or documents to be obtained  by their branches to ensure compliance with provisions of sub-section (5) of  section 10 of the Act. In terms of the Rule 3 of the Foreign Exchange  Management (Current Account Transactions) Rules, 2000, drawal of foreign  exchange for the transactions included in Schedule I thereto is prohibited.
Authorised Dealers may release foreign exchange  for transactions included in Schedule II to the Rules, provided the applicant  has secured the approval from the Ministry/Department of Government of India  indicated against the transaction.
In respect of transactions included in Schedule  III, where the remittance applied for exceeds the limit, if any, indicated in  the schedule or other transactions included in the Schedule III for which no  limit have been stipulated would require prior approval of Reserve Bank.  However, resident individual has the option to avail the Liberalised Remittance  Scheme for Resident Individuals for making additional amount of remittance,  subject to compliance with the terms and conditions of the Scheme. Remittances  for all other current Account transactions which are not specifically  prohibited under the Rules or which are not included in Schedule II or III may  be permitted by the Authorised Dealers without any monetary/percentage ceilings  subject to compliance with the provisions of subsection (5) of Section 10 of  the Act. Remittances for transactions included in Schedule III may be permitted  by Authorised Dealers up to the ceiling prescribed thereto.
Remittances to non-residents are allowed to be  made by the Authorised Dealers on production of an undertaking by the remitter  and a Certificate from a Chartered Accountant in the formats prescribed by the  Central Board of Direct Taxes, Ministry of Finance, Government of India in  their Circular No.10/2002 dated October 9, 2002. [cf. A.P. (DIR Series) Circular  No.56 dated November 26, 2002].
2. Release of foreign exchange  on self declaration basis
Authorised Dealers may allow remittances up to  USD 100,000 each towards (i) employment abroad (ii) emigration (iii)  maintenance of close relatives abroad (iv) education abroad and (v) medical  treatment abroad without insisting on any supporting documents but on the basis  of self declaration incorporating the basic details of the transaction and  submission of Application in Form A2. Authorised Dealers should also ensure  that payment for purchase of foreign exchange is made by the applicant by means  of cheque or demand draft or by debit to his/her account. Authorised  Dealer may also accept the payment through credit /debit/prepaid card of  the card holder as stipulated in our A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.40 dated  December 10, 2008. In addition, the existing facility of release of exchange by  Authorised Persons up to USD 10,000 or its equivalent in one financial year for  one or more private visits to any country (except Nepal and Bhutan) will  continue to be available on a self-declaration basis.
3. Small Value Remittances
Authorized dealers may release foreign exchange  not exceeding USD 5,000 or its equivalent, for all permissible current account  transactions. Authorised Dealers may obtain
simplified  Application-cum-Declaration
form (Form A2) as shown at
Annex-2.
4. Liberalized Remittance Scheme for Resident  Individuals
The remittance under the Scheme is available to  the resident individuals for any permitted current or capital account  transactions or a combination of both.
The facility under the Scheme is in addition to  those already included in Schedule III of Foreign Exchange Management  (Current Account Transactions) Rules, 2000. Remittances towards gift and  donations have been subsumed under the Scheme.
Under the scheme,  resident individuals can acquire and hold immovable property. Individuals can  acquire shares or debt instruments or any other assets outside India, without  prior approval of the Reserve Bank. They can also open, maintain and hold  foreign currency accounts with banks outside India. However remittance from  India for margin or margin calls to overseas exchanges/overseas counterparty  are not allowed under the scheme.
The individual will have to designate a branch  of an AD through which all the remittances under the scheme will be made. It is  mandatory to have PAN number to make remittances under the Scheme.
While allowing the facility to resident  individuals, Authorised Dealers are required to ensure that “
Know Your  Customer
” guidelines have been implemented in respect of bank accounts.  They should also comply with the
Anti-Money Laundering Rules
in force  while allowing the facility.
The applicants should have maintained the bank  account with the bank for a minimum period of one year prior to the remittance.  If the applicant seeking to make the remittance is a new customer of the bank,  Authorised Dealers should carry out due diligence on the opening, operation and  maintenance of the account. Further, the Authorised Dealers should obtain bank  statement for the previous year from the applicant to satisfy themselves  regarding the source of funds. If such a bank statement is not available,  copies of the latest Income Tax Assessment Order or Return filed by the  applicant may be obtained.
The Authorised Dealer should ensure that the  payment is received out of funds belonging to the person seeking to make the  remittance, by a cheque drawn on the applicant's bank account or by debit to his  account or by Demand Draft / Pay Order. The banks should not extend any kind of  credit facilities to resident individuals to facilitate remittances under the  Scheme.
The remittances made under this Scheme will be  reported in the R-Return in the normal course. The Authorised Dealers may also  prepare and keep on record dummy Form A2, in respect of remittances exceeding  USD 25000. In addition, Authorised Dealers would also furnish information on  the number of applicants and total amount remitted under the Scheme, on a
monthly  basis,
to the Reserve Bank of India, through the ORFS.
APPENDIX-1
List of  circulars, which have been consolidated in the Master Circular -
Miscellaneous Remittances from India -  Facilities for Residents
http://www.rbi.org.in/Scripts/BS_ApCircularsDisplay.aspx
http://www.rbi.org.in/Scripts/Bs_FemaNotifications.aspx
Sl. No.
Circular No.
Date
1.
A.P.(DIR Series) Circular No.1
June 1, 2000
2.
A.P.(DIR Series) Circular    No.19
October 30, 2000
3.
A.P.(DIR Series) Circular No.20
November 16, 2000
4.
A.P.(DIR Series) Circular No.11
November 13, 2001
5.
A.P.(DIR Series) Circular No.12
November 23, 2001
6.
EC.CO.FMD.599/18.08.01/2001-02
January 21, 2002
7
A.P.(DIR Series) Circular No.53
June 27, 2002
8.
A.P.(DIR Series) Circular No.16
September 12, 2002
9.
A.P. (DIR Series)    Circular No.17
September 12, 2002
10.
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.37
November 1, 2002
11.
A.P.(DIR Series) Circular No.51
November 18, 2002
12.
A.P. (DIR    Series) Circular No.53
November 23, 2002
13.
A.P. (DIR    Series) Circular No.54
November 25, 2002
14
A.P. (DIR    Series) Circular No.56
November 26,2002
15.
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.64
December 24, 2002
16
A.P. (DIR Series)    Circular No.65
January 6, 2003
17.
A.P. (DIR Series)   Circular No.73
January 24, 2003
18.
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular    No.103
May 21, 2003
19.
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular    No.3
July 17, 2003
20.
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular    No.7
August 12, 2003
21.
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular    No.8
August 16, 2003
22.
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular    No.33
November 13, 2003
23.
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular    No.55
December 23, 2003
24
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular    No.64
February 4, 2004
25
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular    No.71
February 20, 2004
26
A.P. (DIR; Series) Circular    No.76
February 24, 2004
27
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular    No.77
March 13, 2004
28
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular    No.86
April 17, 2004
29
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular    No.90
May 3, 2004
30
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular    No.20
October 25, 2004
31
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular    No.38
March 31, 2005
32
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular    No.46
June 14, 2005
33
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular    No.25
March 6, 2006
34
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular    No.13
November 17, 2006
35
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.    14
November 28, 2006
36
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.    24
December 20, 2006
37
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.    38
April 5, 2007
38
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.    58
May 18, 2007
39
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.    9
September 26, 2007
40
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.    36
April 4, 2008
41
Foreign Exchange Management (Current    Account Transactions) Rules,2000
May 3, 2000 (and subsequent amendments)
(Please see page 28)
42
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.15
September 8, 2008
43
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.40
A.P. (F. L. Series) Circular No.03
December 10, 2008
44
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.10
October 5, 2009
45
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.11
October 5, 2009
46
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 50
A.P.(FL Series) Circular No. 7
May 4, 2010
47
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.52
May 13, 2010
48
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.29
December 22, 2010
49
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 48
April 5, 2011
50
A,P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 17
September 16, 2011
51
A,P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 18
September 16, 2011
52
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 32
October 10, 2011
53
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 37
October 19, 2011
54
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 90
March 6, 2012
55
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 102
April 2, 2012
56
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 118
May 7, 2012
57
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 106
May 23, 2013
58
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.24
August 14, 2013
59
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.32
September 4, 2013
60
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 138
June 3, 2014
61
A.P.(DIR Series)  Circular No. 5
July 17, 2014
62
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 19
August 11, 2014
63
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 40
November 21, 2014
APPENDIX-2
1. Section 5 of FEMA, 1999
Current Account Transactions
Any person may sell or draw foreign exchange to  or from an authorised person if such sale or drawal is a current account  transaction:
Provided that the Central Government may, in  public interest and in consultation with the Reserve Bank, impose such  reasonable restrictions for current account transactions as may be prescribed.
(para  A.1.1 of Master Circular)
2. Rule 3 of FEM (CAT) Rules, 2000
Prohibition on drawal of Foreign Exchange
- Drawal of foreign exchange by any person for the  following purpose is prohibited, namely:-
(a) a  transaction specified in the Schedule I; or (b) a travel to Nepal and/or  Bhutan; or (c) a transaction with a person resident in Nepal or Bhutan;  Provided that the prohibition in clause (c) may be exempted by RBI subject to  such terms and conditions as it may consider necessary to stipulate by special  or general order.
(para A.1.4 of Master Circular)
3. Sub-section (5) of Section 10 of the FEMA,  1999
An authorized person shall before undertaking  any transaction in foreign exchange on behalf of any person, require that  person to make such declaration and to give such information as will reasonably  satisfy him that the transaction will not involve, and is not designed for the  purpose of any contravention or evasion of the provisions of this Act or  of any rule, regulation, notification, direction or order made there under and where the said person refuses to comply  any such requirement or makes only unsatisfactory compliance therewith , the  authorized person shall refuse in writing to undertake the transaction and  shall , if he has reason to believe that any such contravention or evasion as  aforesaid is contemplated by the person, report the matter to the Reserve  Bank.
(para A.14.1 of Master Circular)
1
Para 2 (d) of FEMCAT Rules
1A
appendix 2 of this  Master Circular
2
Section 2(h) of FEMA 1999
2A
AP DIR 25 dated. March 6, 2006
3
Appendix 2 on page 46
3A
AP DIR 12 dated November 23, 2001
3B
para A2 (c)  of Annex to AP DIR 19 dated October. 30, 2000
4
AP DIR 50 dated May 4, 2010
4A
para A.2  (e) of Annex to AP DIR 19 dated Oct. 30, 2000
5
A.P.DIR 40 dated November 21, 2014
6
AP DIR 118 dated May 7, 2012
7
A.P  DIR.3 dated July 17, 2003
8
AP DIR 17 dated September 12, 2002
,  FEM CAT
7A
item 9 of Schedule III of FEM CAT
7B
para. A.3 of Annex to AP DIR 19 dated October.30,  2000
9
Entry  1 Schedule II FEM CAT
10
Entry 2 Schedule III FEM CAT
11
Schedule III of FEM CAT
12
Para  2 of
AP DIR 58 May 18, 2007
13
Regulation  6A of FEMA 9
14
Para 2 of
AP DIR 58 May 18, 2007
15
Para  2 of
AP DIR 58 May 18, 2007
16
Regulation 6A of FEMA 9
17
Regulation 5A of FEMA 10
18
Regulation  5A of FEMA 10
17A
note to para.A.8 of Annex to AP DIR 19 dated October 30, 2000
17B
para. A.9 of Annex to AP DIR 19, dated October 30, 2000
17C
para. 1 of Annex to AP DIR 54 dated November 24, 2002
17D
para. 2 of Annex to AP DIR 54 dated November 24, 2002
17E
AP  DIR 40 dated December 10, 2008
17F
Note to  para A 10 of AP DIR 19 dated October 30, 2000
19
AP DIR 11 October 5, 2009
20
AP DIR 138 dated June 3, 2014
19A
AP DIR 90 dated March 6, 2012
19B
AP DIR 90 dated March 6, 2012
19C
AP DIR 90 dated March 6, 2012
19D
AP DIR 24 dated August 14, 2013
21
AP  DIR 5 dated July 17, 2014
22
AP  DIR 19 dated August 11, 2014
23
A.P Dir 106 dated May 23, 2013
24
para.8 of  Annex.I to AD M A CIR 11 dated May 16, 2000
25
A.P DIR 20 dated November 16, 2000
26
AP DIR 53 dated June 27, 2002
27
AP DIR 103 dated May 21, 2003
23A
rule 2 (b) read with rule 3 (b) and (c) of FEM  CAT
28
AP  DIR 44 dated June14, 2005
29
AP DIR 44 dated June 14, 2005
30
AP DIR 86 dated April  17, 2004