(64 kb)
Review of norms for opening of onsite/off-site ATMs by Urban Co-operative Banks
RBI/2014-15/114
UBD.CO.LS (PCB) Cir.No.1/07.01.000/2014-15
July 2, 2014
Chief Executive Officers of all
Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks
Dear Sir/Madam
Review of norms for opening of onsite/off-site ATMs by  Urban Co-operative Banks
Please refer to our
circular  ref: UBD (PCB) BPD Cir No.50/09.69.000/2005-06 dated April 28, 2006
in  terms of which UCBs satisfying the criteria of Financially Sound and Well Managed  (FSWM) banks were permitted to set up on-site ATMs without prior approval of  RBI. In terms of our circular ref: UBD.CO.LS.(PCB). Cir.  No.30/07.01.000/2013-14 dated October 15, 2013, prior approval of RBI under  Section 23 of the B. R. Act, 1949 (AACS) is necessary for opening full-fledged  branches, specialized branches (CPCs, RAPCs), satellite / mobile offices,  controlling offices, extension counters and off-site ATMs.
2
.
It has now been decided that CBS-enabled  UCBs which satisfy the FSWM criteria as mentioned at para 2 (a) to (e) of our
circular  UBD.CO.LS (PCB) No. 24/07.01.000/2013-14 dated October 1, 2013
may install  onsite / off-site / mobile ATMs as per their need and potential in their area of  operation without prior approval of RBI, subject to the conditions given below.
The  bank shall have an assessed networth of
`
50 crore and conform to the FSWM criteria based on the Reserve’s Bank inspection  Report relating to the financial year immediately preceding the financial year  in which the ATM (s) is / are proposed to be installed and in the absence thereto,  to the financial year just before the immediate preceding year.
The bank should have an impeccable  record of regulatory compliance and no warning letter / cautionary advice  should have been issued to or monetary penalty imposed on the bank on account  of violations of RBI directives / guidelines during the financial year in which  the ATM(s) is/are proposed to be installed and during the two immediately preceding  financial years.
Mobile ATMs shall  be operated strictly within the bank’s approved area of operation and any  violation thereof may lead to ban on further branch expansion and / or grant of  other regulatory approvals apart from action under section 47 A of the B. R.  Act, 1949 (AACS). Mobile ATMs will have to be linked to a branch as per extant  instructions.
3. The conditions subject to which off-site /  mobile ATMs can be operationalised by UCBs are given in
Annex II
. There is no  change in facilities which can be provided through ATMs.
4. UCBs shall report to the concerned Regional  Office of Reserve Bank under whose jurisdiction the Head Office of the bank is  functioning immediately after operationalisation of offsite / mobile ATMs and  in any case not later than 15 days, as per the format enclosed (
Annex I
) and obtain  authorization under section 23 of the B. R. Act, 1949 (AACS).
Yours faithfully,
(A. K. Bera)
Principal Chief General Manager
Annex I
S.No
Complete Address
Centre Classification (A/B/C/D)
Details of base branch
Date of opening of ATM
Annex II
Conditions subject to which off-site ATMs can be  operationalised by banks
(i) The business transacted  at the Off-site ATM shall be recorded in the books of the respective branch/  base branch / Centralised Data Centre.
(ii) No person other than  the security guard should be posted at such Off Site ATM centre.
(iii) Bank should make  adequate stand-by arrangements for meeting the cash requirements of the ATM.
(iv) The bank should ensure  that only properly sorted and examined notes are put into circulation through  the ATM.
(v) Third party advertisement on the ATM  screens / Network, such as display of products of other manufacturers /dealers  /vendors is not permitted. However, there is no objection to banks utilizing  the ATM screens for displaying their own products