(125 kb)
Issue of Partly Paid Shares and Warrants by Indian Company to Foreign Investors
RBI/2014-15/123
A.P.(DIR  Series) Circular No.3
July 14, 2014
To,
All Category – I Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam/Sir,
Issue of Partly Paid Shares and Warrants by  Indian Company to Foreign Investors
Attention of Authorized Dealers Category –I (AD  Category-I) banks is invited to the  Foreign Exchange Management (Transfer or Issue of Security by a Person Resident  outside India) Regulations, 2000 (principal Regulations) notified by the  Reserve Bank of India vide
Notification No.FEMA.20/2000-RB dated 3rd  May 2000
, in terms of which only equity shares and compulsorily  and mandatorily convertible preference shares/debentures are recognised as  Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) compliant instruments. Further, equity shares  or compulsorily and mandatorily convertible preference shares/debentures  containing an optionality clause but without any option/ right to exit at an  assured price have also been recognised as FDI compliant instruments.
2. A review of the policy as regards partly paid shares and warrants has been  undertaken and it has been decided as under:
(i) Eligible  instruments and investors
Partly paid equity shares and warrants issued by  an Indian company in accordance with the provision of the Companies Act,  2013and the SEBI guidelines, as applicable, shall be eligible instruments for  the purpose of FDI and foreign portfolio investment (FPI) by Foreign  Institutional Investors (FIIs)/Registered Foreign Portfolio Investors(RFPIs)  subject to compliance with FDI and FPI schemes.
(ii) Pricing and receipt of balance  consideration
(a)
Partly paid equity shares
The pricing of the partly paid equity shares shall be determined upfront  and 25% of the total consideration amount ( including share premium, if any),  shall also be received upfront; The  balance consideration towards fully paid equity shares shall be received within a period of 12 months.
The  time period for receipt of the balance consideration within 12 months shall not be insisted upon where  the issue size exceeds rupees five hundred crore  and the issuer complies with Regulation  17 of the SEBI (Issue of Capital and Disclosure Requirements(ICDR)) Regulations  regarding monitoring agency. Similarly, in case of an unlisted Indian company,  the balance consideration amount can be received after 12 months where the  issue size exceeds rupees five hundred  crores. However, the investee company shall appoint a monitoring agency on the  same lines as required in case of a listed Indian company under the SEBI (ICDR)  Regulations. Such monitoring agency (AD  Category -1 bank) shall report to the investee company as prescribed by the  SEBI regulations, ibid, for the listed companies.
(b)
Warrants
The pricing of the warrants and price/ conversion formula shall be  determined upfront and 25% of the consideration amount shall also be received  upfront. The balance consideration towards fully paid up equity shares shall be  received within a period of 18 months;
The  price at the time of conversion should not in any case be lower than the fair  value worked out, at the time of issuance of such warrants, in accordance with  the extant FEMA Regulations and pricing guidelines stipulated by RBI from time  to time. Thus, Investee company shall be free to receive consideration more  than the pre-agreed price.
(iii) Reporting
(a)
Partly paid equity shares
The reporting of receipt of foreign inward  remittance towards each upfront /call payment for FDI transaction shall be made  in Advance Reporting Form (format  enclosed) along with copy/ies of Foreign Inward Remittance Certificate/s  (FIRC), Know Your Customer (KYC) report on non-resident investor and details of  the Government approval, if any. The reporting of issue or transfer of partly  paid shares shall be made in form FC-GPR and form FC-TRS respectively, to the  extent the equity shares are called up. The reporting of purchase/sale of  partly paid shares by FIIs/RFPIs in form LEC by the designated branch of  authorised dealer bank should be in accordance with FEMA regulations.
(b)
Warrants
The identity of non-resident investor shall be disclosed for the purpose  of compliance with KYC norms at the time of issuance of warrants.
The  reporting of receipt of foreign inward  remittance towards each upfront /call payment for FDI transaction shall be made  in Advance Reporting form (
format enclosed
) along with a copy/ies of Foreign Inward  Remittance Certificate/s (FIRC), Know Your Customer (KYC) report on  non-resident investor and details of the Government approval, if any.  The   reporting of issue or transfer of warrants in  form FC-GPR and form FC-TRS respectively, under the head ‘others’, shall  reflect the extent up to which the amount in respect of equity shares has been  called up by the company. The reporting of purchase/sale of warrants by FIIs/RFPIs  in form LEC under the head ‘others’ with suitable details by the designated  branch of authorised dealer  bank of FIIs/RFPIs,  should be in accordance with FEMA regulations.
(iv) Compliance
The onus of compliance of all the conditions under  FEMA as regards entry route, sectoral caps   and all other conditions under FDI guidelines shall be on the Investee  company in case of issue of partly paid shares /warrants  as well as upon resident transferor or  transferee in accordance with extant guidelines in case of  transfer of partly-paid shares/warrants . The  onus of giving notice required under the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013  for transfer of partly-paid shares shall also be on the Investee company.  The onus of compliance with individual limit below  10%  (ten per cent) of the total paid-up  equity capital shall be on each FII/RFPI. Further, the aggregate investments of  all FIIs/RFPIs put together shall not exceed the applicable aggregate limit for  each issue of partly paid shares.
Other conditions
3. The following other conditions shall also be  adhered to:
(a) The Indian company whose  activity/ sector falls under government route would require prior approval of  the Foreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB), Government of India for issue of  partly-paid shares/ warrants.
(b)The forfeiture of the amount paid upfront on non-payment of call money  shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013 and  Income tax provisions, as applicable;
(c) The company while issuing partly paid shares or warrants shall ensure  that the sectoral caps are not breached even after the shares get fully paid-up  or warrants get converted into fully paid equity shares. Similarly, the  Non-resident investors acquiring partly paid shares or convertible debentures  or warrants shall ensure that the sectoral caps are not breached even after the  shares get fully paid-up or warrants get converted into fully paid equity  shares.
(d) The deferment of payment of consideration amount  or shortfall in receipt of consideration amount as per applicable pricing  guidelines by the foreign investors will not be covered under these guidelines  so as to be treated as subscription to partly paid shares and warrants. Thus,  the Investee company under these guidelines for issue/transfer of partly-paid  shares/warrants, shall require to comply with the requirements under the  Companies Act, 2013 for issuance of partly paid shares and warrants;
4.  Non-Resident Indians (NRIs) shall also be eligible to invest on  non-repatriation basis in partly-paid shares and warrants issued by Indian  companies in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act/ SEBI  guidelines / Income tax provisions, as applicable. Investments by NRIs in  partly-paid shares and warrants on non-repatriation basis shall also be subject  to terms and conditions stipulated in Schedule 4 to
Notification No. FEMA.  20/2000-RB dated 3rd May 2000
, as amended from time to time.
5. Reserve Bank has since amended the Principal Regulations  through the Foreign Exchange Management (Transfer or Issue of Security by a  Person Resident outside India) (Ninth Amendment) Regulations, 2014 notified  vide
Notification  No. FEMA. 308 /2014-RB dated June 30, 2014
c.f. G.S.R. No. 436(E)  dated July 8, 2014.
6. Authorised Dealer banks may  bring the contents of this circular to the notice of their constituents and  customers concerned.
7. The directions contained in this circular  have been issued under sections 10(4) and 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management  Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and are without prejudice to permissions/approvals, if  any, required under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(B.P.  Kanungo)
Principal  Chief General Manager