(42 kb)
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in India - Issue/Transfer of Shares or Convertible Debentures - Revised pricing guidelines
RBI/2014-15/129
A. P. (DIR  Series) Circular No. 4
July  15, 2014
To,
All Category –I Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam/Sir,
Foreign  Direct Investment (FDI) in India  -
Issue/Transfer  of Shares or Convertible Debentures
- Revised pricing guidelines
Attention of Authorized Dealers Category – I (AD  Category - I) banks is invited to Regulation 10(A)(b)(i), para 5 of Schedule 1,  para 1(5) of Schedule 2 and para 2(iv) of Schedule 2A to the Foreign Exchange  Management (Transfer or Issue of Security by a Person Resident outside India)  Regulations, 2000 (the Principal Regulations) notified vide
Notification  No. FEMA.20/2000-RB dated May 3, 2000
as amended from time to time, in  terms of which, transfer/issue of shares of an Indian company is subject to  pricing guidelines stipulated by the Reserve Bank and to
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 49 dated May 04, 2010
, depicting the  comprehensive position in this regard.
2. Attention of AD Category-I banks is also invited  to Regulation 9 of the Principal Regulations read with
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 86 dated January 9, 2014
in terms of which  optionality clauses have been allowed in equity shares and compulsorily and  mandatorily convertible preference shares/debentures to be issued to a person  resident outside India under the Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) scheme subject  to conditions mentioned therein.
3. The extant pricing  guidelines in respect of transfer/issue of shares and for exit from investment  in equity shares with or without optionality clauses of listed/unlisted Indian  companies have since been reviewed so as to provide greater freedom and  flexibility to the parties concerned under the FDI framework. The new pricing  guidelines shall be as under:
(i) In case of listed companies
(a) The issue and transfer of shares including compulsorily  convertible preference shares and compulsorily convertible debentures shall be  as per the SEBI guidelines;
(b) The  pricing guidelines for FDI instruments with optionality clauses shall continue  to be in accordance with A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 86 dated January 9,  2014, i.e., the non-resident investor  shall be eligible to exit at the market price prevailing on the recognised  stock exchanges subject to lock-in period as stipulated, without any assured  return.
(ii) In case of unlisted companies
The issue and  transfer of shares including compulsorily convertible preference shares and  compulsorily convertible debentures with or without optionality clauses shall be  at a price worked out as per any internationally accepted pricing methodology  on arm’s length basis. Thus, the guiding principle will be that the  non-resident investor is not guaranteed any assured exit price at the time of  making such investment/agreement and shall exit at a fair price computed as  above at the time of exit subject to lock-in period requirement as applicable in  terms of A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 86 dated January 9, 2014.
4. The changes in the  existing pricing guidelines for FDI applicable to transfer/issue of shares and  for exit from foreign direct investment with optionality clauses for the unlisted  Indian companies are given in the
Annex 1
and
Annex 2
respectively.
5. An Indian company taking on record in its  books any transfer of its shares or convertible debenture by way of sale from a  resident to a non-resident and a non-resident to a resident shall disclose in  its balance sheet for the financial year, in which the transaction took place,  the details of valuation of share or convertible debentures, the pricing  methodology adopted for the same as well as the agency that has given/certified  the valuation.
6. These directions shall come into effect from the  date of the publication of the relative Notification in the Official Gazette.
7. All the other instructions of
A.  P. (DIR Series) Circular No.16 dated October 4, 2004
read with A.P. (DIR  Series) Circular No.49 dated May 4, 2010 and A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 86  dated January 9, 2014 shall remain unchanged.
8. AD Category - I banks  may bring the contents of this circular to the notice of their constituents and  customers.
9 Reserve Bank has since amended the Principal Regulations  through the Foreign Exchange Management (Transfer or Issue of Security by a  Person Resident outside India) (Seventh Amendment) Regulations, 2014 notified  vide
Notification No. FEMA.306/2014-RB dated May 23, 2014
c.f. G.S.R. No. 435(E)  dated July 8, 2014.
10. The directions  contained in this circular have been issued under sections 10(4) and 11(1) of  the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and are without  prejudice to permissions / approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(B.P. Kanungo)
Principal Chief General  Manager
Annex 1
(A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 4 dated 15.07.2014)
Sr. No.
Issue/Transfer of Shares
Existing Provisions
Revised Provisions
1.
Issue of Shares
Issue of Shares to non-residents
Price    of shares issued to persons resident outside India under this Schedule, shall    not be less than
(a)    the price worked out in accordance with the SEBI guidelines, as applicable,    where the shares of the company is
listed
on any recognised stock exchange in India;
(b)    the fair valuation of shares done by a SEBI registered Category - I Merchant    Banker or a Chartered Accountant as    per the discounted free cash flow method, where the shares of the company is
not listed
on any recognised stock    exchange in India ; and
(c)    the price as applicable to transfer of shares from resident to non-resident    as per the pricing guidelines laid    down by the Reserve Bank from time to time, where the issue of shares is on    preferential allotment.
Issue of Shares to non-residents
Price of shares issued to persons    resident outside India    under this Schedule, shall not be less than
No Change in existing clause (a)
(b) the fair valuation of shares    done as per any internationally accepted pricing methodology for valuation of    shares on arm’s length basis, duly certified by a Chartered Accountant or a    SEBI registered Merchant Banker where the shares of the company are
not listed
on any recognised stock    exchange in India
This provision is omitted
2.
Transfer of Shares
Transfer by Resident to Non-resident
(i.e. to foreign national, NRI, FII and incorporated    non-resident entity other than erstwhile OCB)
(a) where shares of an Indian company are listed on    a recognized stock exchange in India, the price of shares transferred by way    of sale shall not be less than the price at which a preferential allotment of    shares can be made under the SEBI Guidelines, as applicable, provided that    the same is determined for such duration as specified therein, preceding the    relevant date, which shall be the date of purchase or sale of shares.
(b) where the shares of an Indian company are not    listed on a recognized stock exchange    in India,    the transfer of shares shall be at a price not less than the fair value to be    determined by a SEBI registered Category – I - Merchant Banker or a Chartered    Accountant as per the discounted free cash flow method.
The price per share arrived at should    be certified by a SEBI registered Category-I-Merchant Banker / Chartered    Accountant.
Transfer by Resident to Non-resident
(i.e. to foreign national, NRI, FII, QFI, RFPI and    incorporated non-resident entity other than erstwhile OCB)
No Change in the existing clause (a)
(b) where the shares of an Indian company are not    listed on a recognized stock exchange in India, the transfer of shares shall    be at a price not less than the fair value worked out as per any internationally accepted pricing    methodology for valuation of shares on arm’s length basis which should be duly certified by a    Chartered Accountant or a SEBI registered Merchant Banker.
3.
Transfer of Shares
Transfer by Non-resident
(i.e. by incorporated non-resident    entity, erstwhile OCB, foreign national, NRI and FII)
to Resident
Price    of shares transferred by way of sale, by non-resident to resident shall not    be more than the minimum price at which the transfer of shares can be made    from a resident to a non-resident as given in para 2 above.
Transfer by Non-resident
(i.e. by incorporated non-resident    entity, erstwhile OCB, foreign national, NRI, FII, QFI and RFPI)
to    Resident
No Change in the existing    clause
Annex 2
(A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.4 dated  15.07.2014 )
c.f. Annex to
A.P.(DIR
                    Series)
                    Circular No. 86
                    dated January 9,
            2014
Earlier condition
Revised condition
Para 2(b)
(ii) In    case of unlisted company, the non-resident investor shall be eligible to exit    from the investment in equity shares of the investee company at a price not    exceeding that arrived at on the basis of Return on Equity (RoE) as per the    latest audited balance sheet. Any agreement permitting return linked to    equity as above shall not be treated as violation of FDI policy/FEMA    Regulations.
Note: For the above purpose, RoE shall mean Profit After Tax / Net    Worth; Net Worth would include all free reserves and paid up capital.
(iii)    Investments in Compulsorily Convertible Debentures (CCDs) and Compulsorily    Convertible Preference Shares (CCPS) of an investee company may be    transferred at a price worked out as per any internationally accepted pricing    methodology at the time of exit duly certified by a Chartered Accountant or a    SEBI registered Merchant Banker. The guiding principle would be that the    non-resident investor is not guaranteed any assured exit price at the time of    making such investment/agreement and shall exit at the price prevailing at    the time of exit, subject to lock-in period requirement, as applicable.
(ii)    In case of an unlisted company, the    non-resident investor shall be eligible to exit from the investment in equity    shares, Compulsorily Convertible Debentures (CCDs) and Compulsorily    Convertible Preference Shares (CCPS) of the investee company at a price not    exceeding that arrived at as per any internationally accepted pricing    methodology on arm’s length basis,    duly certified by a Chartered Accountant or a SEBI registered Merchant    Banker.
The    guiding principle would be that the non-resident investor is not guaranteed    any assured exit price at the time of making such investment/agreements and    shall exit at the fair price computed as above at the time of exit, subject    to lock-in period requirement, as applicable.