(49 kb)
Rupee Drawing Arrangement – Delegation of work to Regional Offices
RBI/2014-15/134
A.  P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 7
July 18, 2014
To,
All  Authorised Dealer Category - I Banks
Dear Sir/  Madam,
Rupee Drawing Arrangement – Delegation  of work to Regional Offices
Attention of Authorised Dealer Category – I (AD Cat – I)  banks is invited to the
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 28 [A. P. (FL/RL Series) Circular No. 02] dated  February 6, 2008
on Memorandum of Instructions for Opening and Maintenance  of Rupee / Foreign Currency Vostro  Accounts of Non-resident Exchange Houses, as amended from time to time.
2. As per para (a) of Annex-II of the  above mentioned circular, the application for obtaining first time approval to  enter into Rupee / Foreign Currency Drawing Arrangements with Exchange Houses needs  to be submitted by the AD Cat-I Bank, in the prescribed format, to the Chief  General Manager-In-Charge, Foreign Exchange Department, Forex Markets Division,  Reserve Bank of India, Central Office, Mumbai - 400001. It has now been decided  to delegate the work of granting first time permission to AD Cat-I Banks for  entering into Rupee Drawing Arrangement (RDA) with non-resident exchange house  to the Regional Offices of the Reserve Bank. Therefore, AD Cat-I Banks willing  to enter into Rupee/ Foreign Currency Drawing Arrangement with non-resident  exchange house for the first time should submit the application, in the  prescribed format, to the respective Regional Office of the Foreign Exchange  Department of the Reserve Bank under whose jurisdiction the registered office  of the applicant falls. Subsequently, AD Cat-I Banks may enter into RDAs,  subject to the prescribed guidelines and inform the concerned Regional Office of  the Reserve Bank, immediately.
3. As per clause (vii) of para (G) –  ‘Reports/ Statements’ of Annex-I of the above mentioned circular, AD Cat-I  Banks are required to submit to the Chief General Manager, Reserve Bank of  India, Foreign Exchange Department, Central Office, Forex Markets Division,  Mumbai- 400001 by 30th June every year an annual review note covering the  period January 1 to December 31 of the previous year, on the vostro accounts of  the Exchange Houses maintained by them under the Rupee/ Foreign Currency  Drawing Arrangements (RDAs), duly approved by their Board. Henceforth, AD Cat-I  Banks should submit the duly approved Annual Review note by 30th  June every year, to the respective Regional Office of the Foreign Exchange  Department of the Reserve Bank under whose jurisdiction the registered office  of the applicant falls.
4. All other instructions issued vide
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 28 [A. P. (FL/RL Series) Circular No. 02] dated  February 6, 2008
, as amended from time to time, will remain unchanged.
5. AD Cat-I Banks may bring the contents  of this circular to the notice of their constituents concerned.
6. The directions contained in this circular have been issued  under Section 10(4) and Section 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act,  1999 (42 of 1999) and are without prejudice to permissions / approvals, if any,  required under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(B. P. Kanungo)
Principal  Chief General Manager