(48 kb)
Foreign investment in India by SEBI registered Long term investors in Government dated Securities
RBI/2014-15/145
A.  P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 13
July 23, 2014
To,
All Authorised Persons
Madam/ Sir,
Foreign  investment in India by SEBI registered Long term investors in
Government dated Securities
Attention of Authorized Dealer  Category-I (AD Category-I) banks is invited to Schedule 5 to the Foreign  Exchange Management (Transfer or Issue of Security by a Person Resident outside  India) Regulations, 2000 notified vide
Notification  No. FEMA.20/2000-RB dated May 3, 2000
, as amended from time to time, in terms  of which SEBI registered Foreign Institutional Investors (FIIs), SEBI  registered Qualified Foreign Investors (QFIs) and long term investors  registered with SEBI may purchase, on repatriation basis Government securities  and non-convertible debentures (NCDs) / bonds issued by an Indian company  subject to such terms and conditions as mentioned therein and limits as  prescribed for the same by RBI and SEBI from time to time.
2. Attention of AD  Category-I banks is also invited to
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No.99 dated January 29, 2014
in terms of which the present limit  for investments by FIIs, QFIs and long term investors in Government securities  stands at USD 30 billion, out of which a sub-limit of USD 10 billion is  available for investment by long term investors in Government dated securities.
3. On a review, it has  been decided to enhance the investment limit in government securities available  to FIIs/QFIs/FPIs by USD 5 billion by correspondingly reducing the amount  available to long term investor from USD 10 billion to USD 5 billion within the  overall limit of USD 30 billion. The incremental investment limit of USD 5  billion shall be required to be invested in government bonds with a minimum  residual maturity of three years. Further, all future investment against the  limit vacated when the current investment by an FII/QFI/FPI runs off either  through sale or redemption shall  also be required to be made in government bonds with a minimum residual  maturity of three years. It is, however, clarified that there will be no  lock-in period and FIIs/QFIs/FPIs shall be free to sell the securities (including that are presently  held with less than three years of residual maturity) to the domestic  investors.
4. The operational  guidelines in this regard will be issued by SEBI.
5. All other existing  conditions for investment in Government securities remain unchanged.
6. AD Category – I banks  may bring the contents of this circular to the notice of their constituents and  customers concerned.
7. The directions  contained in this circular have been issued under sections 10(4) and 11(1) of  the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and are without  prejudice to permissions / approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(B.P.Kanungo)
Principal Chief General Manager