(102 kb)
Know Your Customer (KYC) Norms /Anti-Money Laundering (AML) Standards / Combating of Financing of Terrorism (CFT) /Obligation of banks under Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002 Obligation of banks - Amendment to Prevention of Money-laundering (Maintenance of Records) Rules 2013
RBI/2014-15/160
UBD. BPD (PCB). Cir.No. 5/14.01.062/2014-15
August 5, 2014
The Chief Executive Officer
All Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks
Madam/Dear Sir,
Know Your Customer (KYC)  Norms /Anti-Money Laundering (AML) Standards / Combating of Financing of  Terrorism (CFT) /Obligation of banks under Prevention of Money Laundering Act  (PMLA), 2002 Obligation of banks - Amendment to Prevention of Money-laundering  (Maintenance of Records) Rules 2013
The Government of India had  notified the "Prevention of Money-Laundering (Maintenance of Records)  Amendment Rules, 2013" (Rules) and published the same in the  extraordinary official gazette vide G.S.R. No.576 (E) dated August 27, 2013. In  order to align the existing instructions contained in our
Master  Circular UBD.BPD.  (PCB).MC.No.16/12.05.001/2014-15 dated July 1, 2014
on Know Your  Customer (KYC) norms / Anti-Money Laundering (AML) standards / Combating of  Financing of Terrorism (CFT) / Obligation of banks under PMLA, 2002 with the  amendment to PML Rules, it has been decided to notify the corresponding changes  on account of the amendments.
2. The important changes are mentioned in the
Annex
.
3. A
Copy of the Notification
is attached for detailed reference.
4. Banks may revise their KYC policy in the light of the above instructions and  ensure strict adherence to the same.
Yours faithfully
(Scenta Joy)
General Manager
Annex
Sr. No.
Particulars
Existing Instructions
After amendment
to PML Rules
Change in Instructions of the RBI
1
Definition    of Designated Director - Rule 2 (ba)
New    definition added in the PML Rules.
Designated    Director" means a person designated by the reporting entity to ensure    overall compliance with the obligations imposed under chapter IV of the Act    and the Rules and includes --
i)    the Managing Director or a whole-time Director duly authorized by the Board    of Directors if the reporting entity is a company,
ii)    the managing partner if the reporting entity is a partnership firm,
iii)    the proprietor if the reporting entity is a proprietorship concern,
iv)    the managing trustee if the reporting entity is a trust,
v)    a person or individual, as the case may be, who controls and manages the    affairs of the reporting entity if the reporting entity is an unincorporated    association or a body of individuals, and
vi)    such other person or class of persons as may be notified by the Government if    the reporting entity does not fall in any of the categories above.
Explanation.    - For the purpose of this clause, the terms "Managing Director" and    "Whole-time Director" shall have the meaning assigned to them in    the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).
Reserve    Bank vide
circular    UBD.BPD(PCB) Cir No. 48/14.01.062/2013-14 dated    February 18, 2014
, has advised banks to nominate a Designated Director    for ensuring compliance with the obligations under the PML Act.
2
Definition    of Officially Valid Document - Rule 2(d)
"Officially    valid document" means the passport, the driving license, the Permanent    Account Number (PAN) Card, the Voter's Identity Card issued by Election    Commission of India, job card issued by NREGA duly signed by an officer of    the State Government, the letter issued by the Unique Identification    Authority of India containing details of name, address and Aadhaar number or    any document as notified by the Central Government in consultation with the    Reserve Bank of India or any other document as may be required by the banking    company, or financial institution or intermediary;
"Officially    valid document" means the passport, the driving license, the Permanent    Account Number (PAN) Card, the Voter's Identity Card issued by Election    Commission of India, job card issued by NREGA duly signed by an officer of    the State Government, the letter issued by the Unique Identification    Authority of India containing details of name, address and Aadhaar number or    any document as notified by the Central Government in consultation with the    regulator.
Henceforth,    only the documents mentioned in the rule or any other document as notified by    the Central Government in consultation with the Regulator would be    'officially valid documents'. The discretion given to banks earlier stands    withdrawn.
3
Definition    of transactions - Rule 2 (h)
Transactions    include deposit, withdrawal, exchange or transfer of funds in whatever    currency, whether in cash or by cheque, payment order or other instruments or    by electronic or other non-physical means.
"transaction"    means a purchase, sale, loan, pledge, gift, transfer, delivery or the    arrangement thereof and includes-
i)    opening of an account;
ii)    deposits, withdrawal, exchange or transfer of funds in whatever currency,    whether in cash or by cheque, payment order or other instruments or by    electronic or other non-physical means;
iii)    the use of a safety deposit box or any other form of safe deposit;
iv)    entering into any fiduciary relationship;
v)    any payment made or received in whole or in part of any contractual or other    legal obligation;
vi)    any payment made in respect of playing games of chance for cash or kind    including such activities associated with casino; and
viii)    establishing or creating a legal person or legal arrangement.'
Banks    are required to take note of these changes.
4
Rule    14(i) and Proviso to Rule 2(d)
New    instructions
Rule    14(i) provides that the 'Regulator' may prescribe enhanced or simplified    measures to verify the identity of the customers taking into consideration    the type of customer, business relationship, nature and value of transactions    based on the overall money laundering and terrorist financing risks involved
A    proviso has been added to the definition of 'officially valid document' at    Rule 2(d), which states that where 'simplified measures' are applied for    verifying the identity of customers the following documents shall be deemed    to be 'officially valid documents:
i.    identity card with applicant's Photograph issued by Central/State Government    Departments, Statutory/Regulatory Authorities, Public Sector Undertakings,    Scheduled Commercial Banks, and Public Financial Institutions;
ii.    letter issued by a gazetted officer, with a duly attested photograph of the    person;
In terms    of Rule 14(i), it has been decided by the Reserve Bank that 'simplified    measures' may be applied in the case of 'Low risk' customers taking into    consideration the type of customer, business relationship, nature and value    of transactions based on the overall money laundering and terrorist financing    risks involved. In respect of low risk category of customers, where    simplified measures are applied, it would be sufficient to obtain any of the    documents at (i) and (ii) of proviso to rule 2(d) for the purpose of proof of    identity and proof of address.
5
Rule 3    (1) (B)
(B) all    series of cash transactions integrally connected to each other which have    been valued below rupees ten lakhs or its equivalent in foreign currency    where such series of transactions have taken place within a month;
(B) all    series of cash transactions integrally connected to each other which have    been
individually
valued below rupees ten lakhs or its equivalent in    foreign currency where such series of transactions have taken place within a    month and the monthly aggregate exceeds rupees ten lakhs or its equivalent in    foreign currency
Banks    are required to take note of these changes.
6
Rule    3(E)
New    reporting format added
(
E) all    cross border wire transfers of the value of more than rupees five lakhs or    its equivalent in foreign currency where either the origin or destination of    fund is in India;    to be reported to FIU-IND
These    revised guidelines on reporting of cross border wire transfers (CWTR) have    already been issued in terms of
circular    UBD.BPD(PCB) Cir No.54/14.01.062/2013-14    dated April 7, 2014
.
7
Rule 5
Rule 5    (1)(a) reads as :
Every    reporting entity shall maintain information in respect of transactions with    its client referred to in rule 3 *[in hard and soft copies] in accordance    with the procedure and manner as may be specified by its regulator from time    to time.
Vide    amendments to rules notified on February 12, 2010 words 'hard and soft    copies' were removed. The rule provides that the regulator has to specify the    procedure and manner of maintaining records.
It has    been decided that banks may maintain records of the identity of clients, and    records in respect of transactions with its client referred to in rule 3 in    hard or soft format.
8
Rule 10    (2)
2) The    records of the identity of clients shall be maintained in hard and soft    copies in a manner as may be specified by its regulators from time to time.
2) The    records of the identity of clients shall be maintained in a manner as may be    specified by its regulators from time to time. Regulator has to specify the    procedure and manner of maintaining the records of the identity of clients.
9
Rule    7(1)
New    addition
The    name, designation and address of the Designated Director is to be    communicated to the Director, FIU-IND. In addition, it shall be the duty of    every reporting entity, its Designated Director, officers and employees to    observe the procedure and manner of furnishing and reporting information on    transactions referred to in Rule 3.
Reserve    Bank vide circular
UBD.BPD(PCB)    Cir No.48/14.01.062/2013-14 dated    February 18, 2014
, has advised banks to nominate    a Designated Director. The banks are, therefore, advised to adhere to the    reporting requirements as per this new rule.
10
Rule 8    (1)
All Cash    transactions (in terms of Rule
3 (c))    where forged or counterfeit currency notes or bank notes has been used as    genuine or where any forgery of valuable security or a document has taken    place facilitating the transactions, had to be reported not later than 7    working days from the occurrence of such transactions.
All Cash    transactions (in terms of Rule 3 (c)) where forged or counterfeit currency    notes or bank notes has been used as genuine or where any forgery of valuable    security or a document has taken place facilitating the
transactions,    had to be reported by the 15th day of the succeeding month.
The    banks are advised to adhere to the reporting requirements as per this new    rule.
11
Rule 8    (4)
New    addition
In terms    of Rule 8, while furnishing of information to the Director FIU-IND, delay of    each day in not reporting a transaction or delay of each day in rectifying a    mis- represented transaction beyond the time limit as specified in this rule    shall constitute a separate violation.
The    banks are, therefore, advised to take note of these reporting requirements.
12
Proviso    to Rule 9(1)(ii)
New    instructions
Provided    that where the Regulator is of the view that money laundering and terrorist    financing risks are effectively managed and where this is essential not to    interrupt the normal conduct of business, the Regulator may permit the    reporting entity to complete the verification as soon as reasonably    practicable following the establishment of the relationship;
Accordingly,    it is has been decided that where a customer categorised as low risk expresses    inability to complete the documentation requirements on account of any reason    that the bank considers to be genuine, and where it is essential not to    interrupt the normal conduct of business, the bank may complete the    verification of identity within a period of six months from the date of    establishment of the relationship.
13
Rule    9(2) Reliance on third party due diligence
No    existing instructions on reliance on third party due diligence
For the    purpose of identifying and verifying the identity of customers at the time of    commencement of an account-based relationship, reporting entity may rely on a    third party; subject to the conditions that-
a)    the reporting entity immediately obtains necessary information of such client    due diligence carried out by the third party;
b)    the reporting entity takes adequate steps to satisfy itself that copies of    identification data and other relevant documentation relating to the client    due diligence requirements will be made available from the third party upon    request without delay;
c)    the reporting entity is satisfied that such third party is regulated,    supervised or monitored for, and has measures in place for compliance with    client due diligence and record-keeping requirements in line with the    requirements and obligations under the Act;
d)    the third party is not based in a country or jurisdiction assessed as high    risk; and
e)    the reporting entity is ultimately responsible for client due diligence and    undertaking enhanced due diligence measures, as applicable.
Banks    may rely on third party verification subject to conditions at (a) to (e) of    Rule 9(2)
14
Rule    9(3) Procedure for determining beneficial owner
A. Where    the client is a person other than an individual or trust, the banking company    and financial institution, as the case may be, shall identify the beneficial    owners of the client and take reasonable measures to verify the identity of    such persons, through the following information :
(i)    The identity of the natural person, who, whether acting alone or together, or    through one or more juridical person, exercises control through ownership or    who ultimately has a controlling ownership interest.
Explanation:    Controlling ownership interest means ownership of / entitlement to more than    25 percent of shares or capital or profits of the juridical person, where the    juridical person is a company; ownership of/entitlement to more than 15% of    the capital or profits of the juridical person where the juridical person is    a partnership;
or,    ownership of/entitlement to more than 15% of the property or
capital    or profits of the juridical person where the juridical person is an    unincorporated association or body of individuals.
ii)    In cases where there exists doubt under (i) as to whether the person with the    controlling ownership interest is the beneficial owner or where no natural    person exerts control through ownership interests, the identity of the    natural person exercising control over the juridical person through other    means.
Explanation:    Control through other means can be exercised through voting rights,    agreement, arrangements, etc.
Where no    natural person is identified under (i) or (ii) above, the identity of the    relevant natural person who holds the position of senior managing official.
Where    the client is a trust, the banking company and financial institution, as the    case may be, shall identify the beneficial owners of the client and take    reasonable measures to verify the identity of such persons, through the    identity of the settler of the trust, the trustee, the protector, the    beneficiaries with 15% or more interest in the trust and any other natural    person exercising ultimate effective control over the trust through a chain    of control or ownership.
Where    the client or the owner of the controlling interest is a company listed on a    stock exchange, or is a majority- owned subsidiary of such a company, it is    not necessary to identify and verify the identity of any shareholder or    beneficial owner of such companies.
(a)    where the client is a company, the beneficial owner is the natural person(s),    who, whether acting alone or together, or through one or more juridical    person, has a controlling ownership interest or who exercises control through    other means. Explanation.- For the purpose of this sub- clause-
"Controlling    ownership interest" means ownership of or entitlement to more than    twenty-five percent of shares or capital or profits of the company; "Control"    shall include the right to appoint majority of the directors or to control    the management or policy decisions including by virtue of their shareholding    or management rights or shareholders agreements or voting agreements;
(b)    where the client is a partnership firm, the beneficial owner is the natural    person(s), who, whether acting alone or together, or through one or more juridical    person, has ownership of/entitlement to more than fifteen percent of capital    or profits of the partnership;
c)    where the client is an unincorporated association or body of individuals, the    beneficial owner is the natural person(s), who, whether acting alone or    together, or through one or more juridical person, has ownership of or    entitlement to more than fifteen percent of the property or capital or    profits of such association or body of individuals;
d)    where no natural person is identified under (a) or (b) or (c) above, the    beneficial owner is the relevant natural person who holds the position of    senior managing official;
e)    where the client is a trust, the identification of beneficial owner(s) shall    include identification of the author of the trust, the trustee, the    beneficiaries with fifteen percent or more interest in the trust and any    other natural person exercising ultimate effective control over the trust    through a chain of control or ownership; and
f)    where the client or the owner of the controlling interest is a company listed    on a stock exchange, or is a subsidiary of such a company, it is not    necessary to identify and verify the identity of any shareholder or    beneficial owner of such companies.
Banks    may follow the revised rules for identification of beneficial owner.
15
Rule 9    Proof of Identity and Address required at the time opening an account of an    individual
Copy of    identity proof such as (i)Driving License (ii) Job Card issued by NREGA duly    signed by an officer of the State Govt. (iii) The letter issued by the Unique    Identification Authority of India ( UIDAI) containing details of name,    address and Aadhaar number (iv) Identity card (subject to the bank's    satisfaction) (v) Letter from a recognized public authority or public servant    verifying the identity and residence of the customer to the satisfaction of    bank and one proof of address such as (i) telephone bill, (ii) Bank Account    Statement, (iii) letter from any recognized public authority, 
          (iv)    electricity bill, (v) ration card, (vi) letter from employer (subject to    satisfaction of the bank), (vii) a rent agreement indicating the address of    the customer duly registered with State Government of similar registration    authority.
Any one    document from the Officially Valid Document is only allowed. They are:
the    passport, the driving license, the Permanent Account Number (PAN) Card, the    Voter's Identity Card issued by Election Commission of India, job card issued    by NREGA duly signed by an officer of the State Government, the letter issued    by the Unique Identification Authority of India containing details of name,    address and Aadhaar number.
It is    implied that proof of address also follows from the above documents only.
In view    of the change in the definition of 'Officially Valid Documents,' henceforth,    only the documents mentioned in the revised PML Rules would be accepted for    opening accounts of individuals. Banks would not have the discretion to    accept any other document for this purpose.
16
Rule    9(6) Accounts of companies
i)    Certificate of incorporation and Memorandum & Articles of Association
ii)    Resolution of the Board of Directors to open an account and identification of    those who have authority to operate the account
iii)    Power of Attorney granted to its managers, officers or employees to transact    business on its behalf
iv)    Copy of PAN allotment letter
(v) Copy    of the telephone bill
a)    Certificate of incorporation;
b)    Memorandum and Articles of Association;
c)    A resolution from the Board of Directors and power of attorney granted to its    managers, officers or employees to transact on its behalf; and
d)    An officially valid document in respect of managers, officers or employees    holding an attorney to transact on its behalf.
Banks to    take note of the list of documents to be accepted as specified in the Rules.
17
Rule    9(7) Accounts of partnership firms
i)    Registration certificate, if registered
ii)    Partnership deed
iii)    Power of Attorney granted to a partner or an employee of the firm to transact    business on its behalf
iv)    Any officially valid document identifying the partners and the persons    holding the Power of Attorney and their addresses
v)    Telephone bill in the name of firm/partners
a)    Registration certificate;
b)    Partnership deed; and
c)    An officially valid document in respect of the person holding an attorney to    transact on its behalf.
Banks to    take note of the list of documents to be accepted as specified in the Rules.
18
Rule    9(8) Accounts of trusts and foundations
i)    Certificate of registration, if registered
ii)    Power of Attorney granted to transact business on its behalf
iii)    Any officially valid document to identify the trustees, settlors,    beneficiaries and those holding Power of Attorney, founders/managers/    directors and their addresses
iv)    Resolution of the managing body of the foundation/ association
v)    Telephone bill
a)    Registration certificate;
b)    Trust deed; and
c)    An officially valid document in respect of the person holding a power of    attorney to transact on its behalf.
Banks to    take note of the list of documents to be accepted as specified in the Rules.
19
Rule    9(9) Accounts of Unincorporate d association or body of individuals
No    specific instructions in the existing guidelines
a)    Resolution of the managing body of such association or body of individuals;
b)    Power of attorney granted to him to transact on its behalf;
c)    An officially valid document in respect of the person holding an attorney to    transact on its behalf; and
d)    Such information as may be required by the bank to collectively establish the    legal existence of such an association or body of individuals.
Banks to    take note of the list of documents to be accepted as specified in the Rules.