(24 kb)
Refinancing of Project loans
RBI/2014-15/167
DBOD.BP.BC.No. 31/21.04.132/2014-15
August 7, 2014
All Scheduled Commercial Banks
(excluding RRBs)
Dear Sir,
Refinancing of Project loans
Please  refer to our
circular DBOD.BP.BC.No.24/21.04.132/2014-15  dated July 15, 2014
on ‘Flexible Structuring of Long Term Project Loans to  Infrastructure and Core Industries’, which enables banks to flexibly  structure
new
long term project loans to infrastructure and core  industries.
2. However, with regard to
existing
infrastructure and other project loans, banks were allowed, vide paragraph 2 of  our
circular  DBOD.BP.BC.No.98/21.04.132/2013-14 dated February 26, 2014
on  ‘Framework for Revitalising Distressed Assets in the Economy - Refinancing of  Project Loans, Sale of NPA and Other Regulatory Measures’, to refinance by way of take-out financing,  even without a pre-determined agreement with other banks / FIs, and fix a  longer repayment period without treating the same as restructuring if the  following conditions are satisfied:
Such loans should be 'standard' in the books of  the existing banks, and should have not been restructured in the past;
Such loans should be substantially taken over  (more than 50% of the outstanding loan by value) from the existing financing  banks / financial institutions; and
The repayment period should be fixed by taking  into account the life cycle of the project and cash flows from the project.
3. The feedback received from banks shows that  the above stipulation of substantial take-over of loans i.e., more than 50% of  the outstanding loan by value from the existing financing banks / financial  institutions is generally difficult to achieve, since a significant number of  banks are already part of the consortium/multiple banking arrangement of such project  loans.
4. Therefore, in respect of
existing
project loans, it has been decided that banks may refinance such loans by way  of full or partial take-out financing, even without a pre-determined agreement  with other banks / FIs, and fix a longer repayment period, and the same would  not be considered as restructuring in the books of the existing as well as  taking over lenders, if the following conditions are satisfied:
The aggregate exposure of all institutional lenders  to such project should be minimum Rs.1,000 crore;
The project should have started commercial operation after achieving Date of Commencement of Commercial Operation       (DCCO);
The repayment period should be fixed by taking   into account the life cycle of and cash flows from the project, and, Boards       of the existing and new banks should be satisfied with the viability of   the project. Further, the total repayment period should not exceed 85%       of the initial economic life of the project / concession period in the       case of PPP projects;
Such loans should be ‘standard’ in the books   of the existing banks at the time of the refinancing;
In case of partial take-out, a significant       amount of the loan (a minimum 25% of the outstanding loan by value) should       be taken over by a new set of lenders from the existing financing    banks/Financial Institutions; and
The promoters should bring in additional       equity, if required, so as to reduce the debt to make the current       debt-equity ratio and Debt Service Coverage Ratio (DSCR) of the project       loan acceptable to the banks.
5. The above facility  will be available only once during the life of the
existing
project  loans. The refinancing of existing project loans not meeting the conditions  mentioned at paragraph 4 above will continue to be governed by the instructions  contained in paragraph 2 of our circular dated February 26, 2014 referred to  above.
Yours faithfully,
(Sudarshan Sen)
Chief General Manager-in-Charge