(53 kb)
Usage of ATMs – Rationalisation of number of free transactions
RBI/2014-15/179
DPSS.CO.PD.No. 316/02.10.002/2014-2015
August  14, 2014
The Chairman  and Managing Director / Chief Executive Officers
All Scheduled Commercial Banks including RRBs /
Urban Co-operative Banks / State Co-operative Banks /
District Central Co-operative Banks
Madam / Dear  Sir
Usage of ATMs – Rationalisation  of number of free transactions
The  number of Automated Teller Machines (ATMs), which stood at a little over 27,000  as at end-March 2007, has increased to over 1.6 lakh across the country by  end-March 2014. During the same period, the Point-of-Sale (POS) infrastructure  has increased from 3.2 lakh to 10.65 lakh terminals. The ATMs are being  gradually leveraged by banks to deliver other financial and non-financial products  to their customers. Meanwhile, White Label ATMs (WLAs) have also been  introduced in the country with the objective of increasing the ATM density and  also building the rural and semi-urban ATM infrastructure. However, despite  this growth, the deployment of both ATMs as well as POS infrastructure in the  country is lop-sided with a significantly large presence in metropolitan and  urban areas as compared to rural and semi-urban areas.
2. Recently, a few banks and the Indian  Banks’ Association (IBA) had approached the Reserve Bank seeking changes in the  extant instructions regarding free transactions at other banks’ ATMs. Referring  to the growing cost of ATM deployment and maintenance incurred by banks on the  one hand as well as the rising interchange out-go due to these free  transactions, the IBA had sought the removal of free transactions at other  banks’ ATMs at metro centres and other large townships in the country.
3. In this regard, we draw attention to  our
circular  DPSS No. 1405/02.10.02/2007-2008 dated March 10, 2008
as well as IBA  circular No. CE.RB-1/atm/1284 dated August 31, 2009 on levy of service charges for use of  ATMs. Reference is also invited to our
circular  DPSS.PD.No. 2632/02.10.002/2010-2011 dated May 27, 2011
which, inter alia, state that five  free transactions per month (inclusive of financial and non-financial  transactions) is permitted at other bank ATMs.
4. After an analysis of the ATM  deployment in the country as well as availability of alternate means of  electronic payment infrastructure and access thereto, it has been decided to  revise the existing directions as under:
Taking into account the high density of ATMs, bank  branches and alternate modes of payment available to the customers, the  number of mandatory free ATM transactions for savings bank account customers at  other banks’ ATMs is reduced from the
present five to three transactions per  month
(inclusive of both financial and non-financial transactions) for  transactions done at the ATMs located in the six metro centres, viz. Mumbai,  New Delhi, Chennai, Kolkata, Bengaluru and Hyderabad. Nothing, however,  precludes a bank from offering more than three free transactions at other bank  ATMs to its account holders if it so desires.
This  reduction will, however, not apply to small / no frills / Basic Savings Bank  Deposit account holders who will continue to enjoy five free transactions, as  hitherto.
At  other locations  i.e. other than the six metro centres mentioned above, the present facility of five free transactions for savings bank  account customers shall remain unchanged.
ATM  installing banks are advised to indicate clearly at each ATM location that the  ATM is situated in a ‘metro’ or ‘non-metro’ location using appropriate means (message  displayed on the ATM / sticker / poster, etc.) to enable the customer to  identify the status of the ATM in relation to availability of number of free  transactions. Further, banks are advised to ensure the “ATM location  identifiers” in their ATM database is accurate and kept up-to-date at all times  so as to minimise disputes, if any, in the matter.
The issuing banks are also advised to put in place  proper mechanisms to track such transactions and ensure that no customer  inconvenience or complaints arise on this account.
The  provisions related to levy of charges for use of
own-bank ATMs
, vide our  circular dated March 10, 2008, has also been reviewed. Accordingly, banks are  advised that at least five free transactions (inclusive of financial and non  financial transactions) per month should be permitted to the savings bank  account customers for use of own bank ATMs at all locations. Beyond this, banks  may put in place appropriate Board approved policy relating to charges for  customers for use of own bank ATMs.
The ceiling / cap on customer charges of
Rs.20/-  per transaction (plus service tax, if any) will be applicable
.
Banks are advised to ensure that the charges structure  on ATM transactions, as per their Board approved policy, is informed to the  customer in a fair and transparent manner.
Further, banks are advised  to put in place suitable mechanism for cautioning / advising / alerting the  customers about the number of free transactions (OFF-US as well as ON-US)  already utilised during the month by the customer and the possibility that charges  may be levied as per the banks’ policy on charges.
5. The directive is issued under Section  10(2) read with Section 18 of Payment and Settlement Systems Act 2007, (Act 51  of 2007).
6.  This directive shall come into effect from November 01, 2014.
7. Please acknowledge receipt.
Yours  faithfully
(Vijay  Chugh)
Principal Chief General Manager