(137 kb)
Prudential Norms on Income Recognition, Asset Classification and Provisioning Pertaining to Advances - Projects under Implementation
RBI/2014-15/182
DBOD.No.BP.BC.33/21.04.048/2014-15
August 14, 2014
The Chairman and Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer
All Scheduled Commercial Banks
(Excluding Local Area Banks and Regional Rural Banks)
Dear Sir,
Prudential Norms on Income  Recognition, Asset Classification and
Provisioning Pertaining to Advances - Projects under Implementation
Please refer to
circulars  DBOD.No.BP.BC.85/21.04.048/2009-10 dated March 31, 2010
and
DBOD.BP.BC.No.99/21.04.132/2012-13  dated May 30, 2013
, containing,
inter alia
, instructions relating to  asset classification for project loans before commencement of commercial  operations.
2. In terms of extant  instructions contained in the above mentioned circulars, revisions of the date  of commencement of commercial operations (DCCO) and consequential shift in repayment  schedule for equal or shorter duration (including the start date and end date  of revised repayment schedule)
will not be treated as restructuring
provided that:
(a) The revised DCCO falls  within the period of two years and one year from the original DCCO stipulated  at the time of financial closure for infrastructure projects and  non-infrastructure projects respectively; and
(b) All other terms and  conditions of the loan remain unchanged.
3. Banks have  represented that funding of cost overruns, which may arise on account of extension  of DCCO within the above time limits may be allowed without treating the loans  as restructured.
4. In this connection, it  is observed that, internationally, project finance lenders sanction a ‘standby credit  facility’ to fund cost overruns if needed. Such ‘standby credit facilities’ are  sanctioned at the time of initial financial closure; but disbursed only when  there is a cost overrun. At the time of credit assessment of borrowers/project,  such cost overruns are also taken into account while determining the project  Debt Equity Ratio, Debt Service Coverage Ratio, Fixed Asset Coverage Ratio etc.  Such ‘standby credit facilities’ rank pari passu with base project loans and their  repayment schedule is also the same as that of the base project loans.
5. Accordingly, in cases  where banks have specifically sanctioned a ‘standby facility’ at the time of  initial financial closure to fund cost overruns, they may fund cost overruns as  per the agreed terms and conditions.
6.  Where the initial financial closure does not envisage such financing of cost  overruns, based on the representations from banks, it has been decided to allow  banks to fund cost overruns, which may arise on account of extension of DCCO  within the time limits quoted at paragraph 2 above, without treating the loans  as ‘restructured asset’ subject to the  following conditions:
i) Banks may fund  additional ‘Interest During Construction’, which may arise on account of delay  in completion of a project;
ii) Other cost overruns  (excluding Interest During Construction) up to a maximum of 10% of the original  project cost;
iii) The Debt Equity Ratio as  agreed at the time of initial financial closure should remain unchanged  subsequent to funding cost overruns or improve in favour of the lenders and the  revised Debt Service Coverage Ratio should be acceptable to the lenders;
iv) Disbursement of funds  for cost overruns should start only after the Sponsors/Promoters bring in their  share of funding of the cost overruns; and
iv) All other terms and  conditions of the loan should remain unchanged or enhanced in favour of the  lenders.
Yours  faithfully,
(Sudha  Damodar)
Chief General Manager