(46 kb)
External Commercial Borrowings (ECB) in Indian Rupees
RBI/2014-15/207
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No.25
September  3, 2014
To
All Category - I Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam / Sir,
External Commercial Borrowings (ECB) in Indian Rupees
Attention of Authorised Dealer  Category – I (AD Category – I) banks is invited to Regulation 6 of
Notification  No. FEMA.3/2000-RB dated May 03, 2000
in terms of which persons resident in  India may raise foreign currency loans from non-residents in accordance with  the provisions contained in this Notification. Their attention is also invited  to paragraph 2(ii)(a) of
AP  (DIR Series) Circular No. 27 dated September 23, 2011
in terms of which all eligible borrowers are eligible to  raise ECB in Indian Rupees from foreign equity holders as per the extant ECB  guidelines.
2. With a view to providing greater flexibility for structuring of  ECB arrangements, it has been decided that recognised non-resident ECB lenders  may extend loans in Indian Rupees subject to the following conditions:
The lender should mobilise Indian Rupees through  swaps undertaken with an Authorised Dealer Category-I bank in India.
The  ECB contract should comply with all other conditions applicable to the  automatic and approval routes as the case may be.
The  all-in-cost of such ECBs should be commensurate with prevailing market  conditions.
3.  For the purpose of executing swaps for ECBs denominated in Indian Rupees, the  recognised ECB lender, if it desires, may set up a representative office in  India following the prescribed laid down process.
4.  It may be noted that the hedging arrangement for ECBs denominated in Indian  Rupees extended by non-resident equity-holders shall continue to be governed by  the provisions of
AP  (DIR Series) Circular No. 63 dated December 29, 2011
.
5. AD Category-I banks may bring  the contents of this circular to the notice of their constituents and  customers.
6. The directions contained in  this circular have been issued under sections 10(4) and 11(1) of the Foreign  Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and are without prejudice to  permissions / approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours faithfully
B P  Kanungo
Principal Chief General Manager