(92 kb)
StCBs/DCCBs - Opening of Bank Accounts in the Names of Minors
RBI/2014-15/225
RPCD.CO.RCB.BC.No.29/07.51.010/2014-15
September 09, 2014
All State Co-operative  Banks and Central Co-operative Bank
Dear Sir/Madam,
Opening of Bank Accounts in the Names of Minors
Please refer to our circular RPCD.No.RF.DIR.BC.32/D.1-85  dated January 8, 1985 wherein State / Central Co-operative Banks (StCBs /  DCCBs) were advised to allow minors’ accounts (fixed and savings deposit  accounts) with mothers as guardians to be opened subject to safeguards in  allowing operations in such accounts by ensuring that the minors’ accounts  opened with guardian are not allowed to be overdrawn and that these always  remain in credit.
2. Further, with a view to  promote the objective of financial inclusion and also to bring uniformity among  banks in opening and operating minors’ accounts, StCBs / DCCBs are advised as under:
A savings /fixed / recurring bank deposit       account can be opened by a minor of any age through his/her natural or       legally appointed guardian.
Minors above the age of 10 years may be       allowed to open and operate savings bank accounts independently, if they       so desire. StCBs / DCCBs may, however, keeping in view their risk       management systems, fix limits in terms of age and amount up to which       minors may be allowed to operate the deposit accounts independently. They       can also decide, in their own discretion, as to what minimum documents are       required for opening of accounts by minors.
On attaining majority, the erstwhile minor       should confirm the balance in his/her account and if the account is       operated by the natural guardian / legal guardian, fresh operating       instructions and specimen signature of erstwhile minor should be obtained       and kept on record for all operational purposes.
3. StCBs / DCCBs are  free to offer additional banking facilities like ATM/debit card, cheque book  facility etc., subject to the safeguards that minor accounts are not allowed to  be overdrawn and that these always remain in credit.
Yours faithfully,
(A. Udgata)
Principal Chief General Manager