(116 kb)
StCBs/DCCBs - Need for Bank Branches / ATMs to be made accessible to persons with disabilities
RBI/2014-15/224
RPCD.CO.RCB.BC.28/07.51.010/2014-15
September 09,  2014
All State Co-operative  Banks and Central Co-operative Banks
Dear Sir/Madam,
Need for Bank Branches / ATMs to be made
accessible to persons with disabilities
We have been  receiving several suggestions from members of public through Government of  India and otherwise, on facilitating easy access to bank branches and ATMs by  persons with disabilities for undertaking day to day banking transactions. We  have examined such suggestions. We advise that State  / Central Co-operative Banks (StCBs / DCCBs) have to take  necessary steps
to provide all existing ATMs / future ATMs with ramps
so  that wheel chair users / persons with disabilities can easily access them. Care  may also be taken to make arrangements in such a way that the height of the  ATMs do not create an impediment in their use by wheelchair users. However, in  cases where it is impracticable to provide such ramp facilities, whether  permanently fixed to earth or otherwise, this requirement may be dispensed  with, for reasons recorded and displayed in branches or ATMs concerned.
2. StCBs/DCCBs are  also to take appropriate steps, including providing of ramps at the entrance of  the bank branches, wherever feasible, so that the persons with  disabilities/wheel chair users can enter bank branches and conduct business  without difficulty. StCBs/DCCBs are advised to report the progress made in this  regard periodically to their respective Customer Service Committee of the Board  and ensure compliance.
3. It is advised that StCBs/DCCBs should make all new  ATMs installed as talking ATMs with Braille keypads in future. StCBs/DCCBs  should lay down a road map for converting all existing ATMs as talking ATMs  with Braille keypads and the same may be reviewed from time to time by the  Customer Service Committee of the Board.
4. In addition to the  above, magnifying glasses should also be provided in all branches of  StCBs/DCCBs for the use of persons with low vision, wherever they require for  carrying out banking transactions with ease. The branches should display at a  prominent place notice about the availability of magnifying glasses and other  facilities available for persons with disabilities.
Yours faithfully,
(A. Udgata)
Principal Chief General Manager