(49 kb)
Know Your Customer (KYC) Norms /Anti-Money Laundering (AML) Standards /Combating of Financing of Terrorism (CFT) / Obligation of banks under Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002 Obligation of banks – Client Due Diligence measures - UCBs
RBI/2014-15/232
UBD. BPD (PCB). Cir.No.15/14.01.062/2014-15
September 16, 2014
The Chief Executive Officer
All Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks
Madam/Dear Sir,
Know Your Customer (KYC)  Norms /Anti-Money Laundering (AML) Standards / Combating of Financing of  Terrorism (CFT) /Obligation of banks under Prevention of Money Laundering Act  (PMLA), 2002 Obligation of banks – Client Due Diligence measures - UCBs
Please refer to
paragraph 2
of our Master  Circular UBD.BPD(PCB)MC.No.16/12.05.001/ 2014-15 July 1, 2014, as per which  banks are required to:
Undertake client due diligence measures while commencing an  account-based relationship. Such measures include identifying and verifying the  customer and beneficial owner on the basis of reliable and independent  information and data or documentation.
Apply client due diligence measures to existing clients at an  interval of two/eight/ten years in respect of high/medium/low risk clients  respectively.
Carry out ongoing due diligence of existing clients in order  to ensure that their transactions are consistent with the bank’s knowledge of  the client, his business and risk profile and where necessary, the source of  funds.
Obtain ‘positive confirmation’ at two/three years in  respect of medium and low risk customers respectively.
2. Taking into account the feedback received in  this regard and keeping in view the provisions of the PML Rules, the matter has  been reviewed. Accordingly, it is advised that while the requirements of client  due diligence measures applied when establishing an account-based relationship  and on-going due diligence would continue as indicated at paragraph 1(i) to  1(iii) above, it has been decided to dispense with the requirement of ‘positive  confirmation’ as indicated at paragraph 1(iv) above.
3. Further, the requirement of applying client  due diligence measures to existing clients at an interval of two/eight/ten  years in respect of high/medium/low risk clients respectively, would also  continue taking into account whether and when client due diligence measures  have previously been undertaken and the adequacy of data obtained. Physical  presence of the clients may, however, not be insisted upon at the time of such  periodic updations.
4. Banks may revise their KYC policy in the  light of the above instructions and ensure strict adherence to the same.
Yours faithfully
(Suma Varma)
Chief General Manager