(171 kb)
Know Your Customer (KYC) Norms /Anti-Money Laundering (AML) Standards/ Combating of Financing of Terrorism (CFT) guidelines – clarifications on periodic updation of low risk customers, non-requirement of repeated KYC for the same customer to open new accounts and partial freezing of KYC non-compliant accounts- Primary (Urban) Co-operative banks (UCBs)
RBI/2014-15/274
UBD. BPD (PCB). Cir.No.23/14.01.062/2014-15
October 22, 2014
The Chief Executive Officer
All  Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks
Madam/Dear Sir,
Know Your Customer (KYC) Norms /Anti-Money  Laundering (AML) Standards/ Combating of Financing of Terrorism (CFT)  guidelines – clarifications on periodic updation of low risk customers,  non-requirement of repeated KYC for the same customer to open new accounts and  partial freezing of KYC non-compliant accounts- Primary (Urban) Co-operative  banks (UCBs)
Reserve Bank has been simplifying the KYC norms  from time to time, in order to ease the difficulties faced by common persons  while opening bank accounts and complying with periodic updation requirements.  It has, however, been brought to the notice of the Reserve Bank that despite  such measures and various attempts by banks in this direction, customers are  still facing difficulties in complying with the periodic updation requirements.  Further, it is also reported that there are still many KYC non-compliant  accounts due to non-submission of KYC documents by customers at the time of  periodical updation. This often leads to KYC non-compliant accounts continuing  to be operated and making them vulnerable to money-laundering and terrorist  financing activities.
2. In this context, a reference is invited to  paragraphs 31 and 32 (
extracts  enclosed
) of the Fourth Bi-Monthly Monetary Policy Statement, 2014-15,  announced on September 30, 2014, on easing norms to be followed during periodic  updation and introduction of ‘partial freezing’ on KYC non-compliant accounts.
3. In terms of our
circular  RBI/2014-15/232 UBD. BPD (PCB).  Cir.No.15/14.01.062/2014-15 dated September 16, 2014
on ‘Client Due  Diligence’, the requirement of applying client due diligence measures to  existing clients at an interval of two/eight/ten years in respect of  high/medium/low risk clients respectively, would continue taking into account  whether and when client due diligence measures have previously been undertaken  and the adequacy of data obtained. In order to further ease the difficulties in  complying with the KYC requirements, within the overall framework of the  Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 (PMLA) and Rules (PMLR), it is  clarified as under:
(i) UCBs need not seek fresh proofs of identity  and address at the time of periodic updation, from those customers who are  categorised as ‘low risk’, in case of no change in status with respect to their  identities and addresses. A self-certification by the customer to that effect  should suffice in such cases. In case of change of address of such ‘low risk’  customers, they could merely forward a certified copy of the document (proof of  address) by mail/post, etc. UCBs may not insist on physical presence of such  low risk customer at the time of periodic updation.
(ii) If an existing KYC compliant customer of a  bank desires to open another account in the same bank, there should be no need  for submission of fresh proof of identity and/or proof of address for the  purpose.
4. As regards non-compliance of KYC requirements  by the customers despite repeated reminders by banks, it has been decided that  banks should impose ‘partial freezing’ in case of such KYC non-compliance in a  phased manner. Meanwhile, the account holders can revive accounts by submitting  the KYC documents as per instructions in force. While imposing ‘partial  freezing’, banks are advised to ensure that the option of ‘partial freezing’ is  exercised after giving due notice of three months initially to the customers to  comply with KYC requirements and followed by a reminder for further period of  three months. Thereafter, banks may impose ‘partial freezing’ by allowing all  credits and disallowing all debits with the freedom to close the accounts. If  the accounts are still KYC non-compliant after six months of imposing initial  ‘partial freezing’ banks may disallow all debits and credits from/to the  accounts, rendering them inoperative. Further, it would always be open to the  bank to close the accounts of such customers.
5. UCBs may revise their KYC policy in the light  of the above instructions and ensure strict adherence to the same.
Yours faithfully
(Suma  Varma)
Chief General Manager
Encl: as above
Fourth Bi-Monthly Monetary Policy Statement,  2014-15
31. With a view to easing difficulties faced by  common persons while opening bank accounts and during periodic updating,  guidelines on ‘know your customer’ (KYC) will be further simplified with  immediate effect so that banks:
do not insist on physical presence of the customer at the  time of periodic updating; do not seek fresh proof of identity and address at  the time of periodic updating in case of no change in status for 'low risk'  customers; allow self-certification; accept a certified copy of the document by  mail/post, etc; and
do not seek fresh documents if an existing KYC  compliant customer of a bank desires to open another account in the bank.
32. There is a need for banks to complete KYC  for all customers including long standing ‘low risk’ customers. Banks should  complete documentation, while minimising the effort on the part of the customer  to what is strictly needed. In the event that customers are unable to comply  within a reasonable time period, ‘partial freezing’ may be introduced in  respect of KYC non-compliant customers i.e., credits would be allowed in such  accounts while debits would not be allowed, with an option to the account  holder to close the account and take back the money in the account.