(55 kb)
Cheque related fraud cases - preventive measures
RBI/2014-15/303
DCBR.CO.BPD.(PCB). Cir No 2/12.05.001/2014-15
November 13, 2014
The Chief Executive Officer
All Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks
Dear Sir / Madam,
Cheque related fraud cases - preventive measures
The rise in the number of cheque related fraud  cases is a matter of serious concern. It is evident that many of such frauds  could have been avoided had due diligence been observed at the time of handling  and/or processing the cheques and monitoring newly opened accounts. Primary (Urban)  Co-operative Banks (UCBs) are, therefore, advised  to review and strengthen the controls in the cheque presenting/passing and  account monitoring processes and to ensure that all procedural guidelines  including preventive measures are followed meticulously by the dealing  staff/officials. Given below are some of the preventive measures UCBs may follow in this regard. The list is only indicative.
Ensuring the       use of 100% CTS - 2010 compliant cheques.
Strengthening       the infrastructure at the cheque handling Service Branches and bestowing       special attention on the quality of equipment and personnel posted for CTS       based clearing, so that it is not merely a mechanical process.
Ensuring       that the beneficiary is KYC compliant so that the bank has recourse to       him/her as long as he/she remains a customer of the bank.
Examination       under UV lamp for all cheques beyond a threshold of say, Rs.2 lakh.
Checking at       multiple levels, of cheques above a threshold of say, Rs. 5 lakh.
Close       monitoring of credits and debits in newly opened transaction accounts       based on risk categorization.
Sending an SMS alert to payer/drawer when cheques are  received in clearing.
The threshold limits mentioned above can be reduced  or increased at a later stage with the approval of the Board depending on the  volume of cheques handled by the UCBs or it's risk appetite.
2. In addition to the above, UCBs may consider the  following preventive measures for dealing with suspicious or large value  cheques (in relation to an account’s normal level of operations):
a) Alerting the customer by a phone call and  getting the confirmation from the payer/drawer.
b) Contacting base branch in case of non-home  cheques.
The above may be resorted to selectively if not  found feasible to be implemented systematically.
3. It has been reported that in some cases even  though the original cheques were in the custody of the customer, cheques with  the same series had been presented and encashed by fraudsters. In this  connection, UCBs are advised to take appropriate precautionary measures to  ensure that the confidential information viz., customer name / account number /  signature, cheque serial numbers and other related information are neither  compromised nor misused either from the bank or from the vendors’ (printers,  couriers etc.) side. Due care and secure handling is also to be exercised in  the movement of cheques from the time they are tendered over the counters or  dropped in the collection boxes by customers.
Yours faithfully
(Suma Varma)
Chief General Manager