(32 kb)
External Commercial Borrowings (ECB) Policy – Parking of ECB proceeds
RBI/2014-15/309
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 39
November 21, 2014
To
All Authorised Dealer Category-I Banks
Madam  / Sir
External  Commercial Borrowings (ECB) Policy – Parking of ECB proceeds
Attention  of Authorized Dealer Category - I (AD Category- I) banks is invited to
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 52 dated  November 23, 2011
relating to parking of proceeds of External  Commercial Borrowings (ECB).
2. At present, eligible ECB borrowers are  required to bring ECB proceeds, meant for Rupee expenditure in India for  permitted end uses, such as, local sourcing of capital goods, on-lending to  Self-Help Groups or for micro credit, payment for spectrum allocation, etc.,  immediately for credit to their Rupee accounts with AD Category - I banks in  India.
3. With a view to providing greater  flexibility to the ECB borrowers in structuring draw down of ECB proceeds and  utilisation of the same for permitted end uses, it has been decided to permit  AD Category -I banks to allow eligible ECB borrowers to park ECB proceeds (both  under the automatic and approval routes) in term deposits with AD Category- I  banks in India for a maximum  period of six months pending utilisation for permitted end uses. The facility  will be with the following conditions:
The  applicable guidelines on eligible borrower, recognised lender, average maturity  period, all-in-cost, permitted end uses, etc. should be complied with.
No  charge in any form should be created on such term deposits i.e. to say that the  term deposits should be kept unencumbered during their currency.
Such  term deposits should be exclusively in the name of the borrower.
Such term deposits can be liquidated as and when  required.
4. The amended ECB policy will come into  force with immediate effect and is subject to review. All other aspects of ECB  policy would remain unchanged.
5. AD Category banks may bring the  contents of this circular to the notice of their constituents and customers.
6. The directions contained in this  circular have been issued under sections 10(4) and 11(1) of the Foreign  Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and are without prejudice to  permissions / approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours  faithfully
(B P  Kanungo)
Principal  Chief General Manager