(249 kb)
Basel III Framework on Liquidity Standards – Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR), Liquidity Risk Monitoring Tools and LCR Disclosure Standards
RBI/2014-15/328
DBR.BP.BC.No.52/21.04.098/2014-15
November 28,  2014
All Scheduled Commercial Banks
(excluding RRBs)
Dear Sir,
Basel III Framework on Liquidity Standards – Liquidity  Coverage Ratio (LCR), Liquidity Risk Monitoring Tools and LCR Disclosure  Standards
Please refer to the ‘
Fourth Bi-monthly Monetary Policy Statement,  2014-15
’ announced on September 30, 2014, wherein it was proposed  that pursuant to the guidelines issued on the  liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) in June 2014 which permitted banks to reckon  government securities to the extent allowed by the Reserve Bank under its  marginal standing facility as Level 1 High Quality Liquid Assets (HQLA) under  the LCR, banks will be allowed to:
include  government securities held by them up to another 5 per cent of their NDTL  within the mandatory SLR requirement as level 1 HQLA in order to facilitate  their meeting the LCR requirement while retaining the prudential aspect of the  statutory liquidity ratio (SLR). This additional liquidity up to 5 per cent of  NDTL will be available, in addition to the MSF,  through a special facility and at a rate higher than the MSF rate as  decided by the Reserve Bank from time to time taking into account the market conditions;  and
such government securities reckoned for the LCR  should be valued at an amount no greater than their current market value as  HQLAs are required to be taken at their market value for the purpose of  computing the LCR.
Accordingly, detailed  guidelines in the matter are given below:
2. In terms of  paragraph 5.4 of our
circular DBOD.BP.BC.No.120/21.04.098/2013-14  dated June 9, 2014
on ‘Basel III Framework on Liquidity Standards – Liquidity Coverage Ratio  (LCR), Liquidity Risk Monitoring Tools and LCR Disclosure Standards’, the  following assets have been allowed as the Level 1 High Quality Liquid Assets  (HQLAs) for the purpose of computing the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) of  banks:
i. Cash  including cash reserves in excess of required CRR.
ii. Government  securities in excess of the minimum SLR requirement.
iii. Within the mandatory SLR requirement,  Government securities to the extent allowed by RBI, under Marginal Standing  Facility (MSF).
iv. Marketable securities issued or  guaranteed by foreign sovereigns satisfying all the following conditions:
assigned a 0% risk  weight under the Basel II standardized approach for credit risk;
Traded in large, deep and active repo or cash  markets characterised by a low level of concentration; and proven record as a  reliable source of liquidity in the markets (repo or sale) even during stressed  market conditions.
not issued by a bank/financial institution/NBFC or  any of its affiliated entities.
3. Henceforth, in  addition to the above-mentioned assets, banks will be permitted to reckon government  securities held by them up to another 5 per cent of their NDTL within the  mandatory SLR requirement as level 1 HQLA for the purpose of computing their  Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR). For the purpose of computing the LCR, such reckoned  government securities within the mandatory SLR requirement should be valued at  an amount no greater than their current market value (irrespective of the  category of holding the security, i.e.HTM, AFS or HFT).
4. Banks will be permitted  to avail liquidity facility against such securities under a special facility to  be called ‘Facility to Avail Liquidity for Liquidity Coverage Ratio’ (FALLCR),  essential features of which are given below:
Eligibility:
Availing of liquidity against such securities would be  permitted to banks only under the  conditions of stress as described under paragraph 4.3 of the above-mentioned  circular dated June 9, 2014, and after  utilisation of all other HQLAs (including securities permitted under MSF).Banks  will be required to furnish a declaration to this effect that they have  exhausted their all other HQLAs before availing of the FALLCR.
Tenor:
This facility can be availed/rolled over up to a maximum  period of 90 days.
Haircut:
Liquidity against securities under FALLCR will be available  after applying haircuts as stipulated for MSF.
Facility rate:
Rate of interest on the funds  availed under this facility will be 200 bps above the prevailing LAF repo rate,  up to a period of 90 days, or as decided by the RBI from time to time.
Effective date:
The above facility will be effective from January 1,  2015.
Yours faithfully,
(Sudarshan  Sen)
Chief General Manager