(47 kb)
Rupee Drawing Arrangement – Delegation of work to Regional Offices-Submission of Statements / Returns
RBI/2014-15/358
A.P.(DIR Series)  Circular No.50
December 16, 2014
To
All  Authorised Dealer Category - I Banks
Madam/ Sir,
Rupee Drawing Arrangement – Delegation of work to Regional  Offices-Submission of Statements / Returns
Attention  of Authorised Dealer Category – I (AD Cat – I) banks is invited to
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 28 [A. P. (FL/RL Series)  Circular No. 02] dated February 6, 2008
on Memorandum of Instructions  for Opening and Maintenance of Rupee / Foreign Currency Vostro Accounts of  Non-resident Exchange Houses, as amended from time to time.
2.  In continuation to
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 7 dated July 18, 2014
, it is clarified that subsequent to delegation of Rupee Drawing Arrangement (RDA) work, Authorised Dealer Category I banks are  required to make all their correspondence with Reserve Bank including  submission of prescribed statements to the Regional Office of the Foreign Exchange  Department of the Reserve Bank, under whose jurisdiction their registered  offices function. It has been observed that several Authorised Dealer Category  I banks continue to submit the correspondence / statements to the Central Office,  causing avoidable delays in scrutiny / processing. Thus, Authorised Dealer  Category I banks are advised to note the instructions regarding correspondence  and submission of statements to the concerned Regional Office, as mentioned  above.
3.  All other instructions issued vide
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 28  [A. P. (FL/RL Series) Circular No. 02] dated February 6, 2008
, as amended from  time to time, will remain unchanged.
4.  AD Category-I Banks may bring the contents of this circular to the notice of  their constituents concerned.
5.  The directions contained in this circular have been issued under Section 10(4)  and Section 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and  are without prejudice to permissions / approvals, if any, required under any  other law.
Yours faithfully,
(B. P. Kanungo)
Principal Chief General Manager