(117 kb)
Non-Cooperative Borrowers
RBI/2014-15/362
DBR.No.CID.BC.54/20.16.064/2014-15
December 22, 2014
All Scheduled  Commercial Banks
(Excluding RRBs)
All-India  Term-Lending and Refinancing Institutions
(Exim Bank, NABARD,  NHB and SIDBI)
Dear Sir / Madam
Non-Cooperative  Borrowers
Please refer to our
circular  DBOD.BP.BC.No.97/21.04.132/2013-14 dated  February 26, 2014
on ‘Framework for  Revitalising Distressed Assets in the Economy - Guidelines on Joint Lenders'  Forum (JLF) and Corrective Action Plan (CAP)’ which inter-alia, provides for  specific prudential measures and reporting requirements in respect of  Non-Cooperative Borrowers. The definition of a Non-Cooperative Borrower as  contained therein is hereby modified to read as under:
A  non-cooperative borrower is one who does not engage constructively with his  lender by defaulting in timely repayment of dues while having ability to pay, thwarting  lenders’ efforts for recovery of their dues by not providing necessary  information sought, denying access to assets financed / collateral securities,  obstructing sale of securities, etc. In effect, a non-cooperative borrower is a  defaulter who deliberately stone walls legitimate efforts of the lenders to  recover their dues.
2. In  this connection, we advise that banks/FIs should take the following measures in  classifying/declassifying a borrower as non-cooperative borrower and reporting  information on such borrowers to Central Repository  of Information on Large Credits (CRILC):
The  cut off limit for classifying borrowers as non-cooperative would be those  borrowers having aggregate fund-based and non-fund  based facilities of Rs.50 million from the concerned bank/FI. A non-cooperative  borrower in case of a company will include, besides the company, its promoters  and directors (excluding independent directors and directors nominated by the  Government and the lending institutions). In case of business enterprises  (other than companies), non-cooperative borrowers would include persons who are  in-charge and responsible for the management of the affairs of the business  enterprise.
It  would be imperative on the part of the banks / FIs to put in place a  transparent mechanism for classifying borrowers as non-cooperative. A solitary  or isolated instance should not be the basis for such classification. The  decision to classify the borrower as non-cooperative borrower should be  entrusted to a Committee of higher functionaries headed by an Executive  Director and consisting of two other senior officers of the rank of General  Managers/ Deputy General Managers as decided by the Board of the concerned  bank/FI.
If  the Committee concludes that the borrower is non-cooperative, it shall issue a  Show Cause Notice to the concerned borrower (and the promoter/whole-time  directors in case of companies) and call for his submission and after  considering his submission issue an order recording the borrower to be  non-cooperative and the reasons for the same. An opportunity should be given to  the borrower for a personal hearing if the Committee feels such an opportunity  is necessary.
The  order of the Committee should be reviewed by another Committee headed by the  Chairman / CEO and MD and consisting, in addition, of two independent directors  of the Bank/FI and the order shall become final only after it is confirmed by  the said Review Committee.
Banks/FIs  will be required to report information on their non-cooperative borrowers to  CRILC under CRILC-Main (Quarterly Submission) return as advised vide
circular  DBS.OSMOS.No.14703/33.01.001/2013-14 dated May 22, 2014
on ‘Reporting to Central Repository of Information on  Large Credits (CRILC)’. As mentioned in this circular, the quarterly  CRILC Main report is required to be submitted within 21 days from the close of  the relevant quarter.
Boards  of banks/FIs should review on a half-yearly basis the status of non-cooperative  borrowers for deciding whether their names can be declassified as evidenced by  their return to credit discipline and cooperative dealings. Removal of names  from the list of non-cooperative borrowers should be separately reported under  CRILC with adequate reasoning/rationale for such removal.
If any particular entity as mentioned  in (a) above is reported as non-cooperative, any fresh exposure to such a  borrower will by implication entail greater risk necessitating higher  provisioning. Banks/FIs will therefore be required to make higher provisioning  as applicable to substandard assets in respect of new loans sanctioned to such  borrowers as also new loans sanctioned to any other company that has on its  board of directors any of the whole time directors/promoters of a  non-cooperative borrowing company or any firm in which such a non-cooperative  borrower is in charge of management of the affairs. However, for the purpose of  asset classification and income recognition, the new loans would be treated as  standard assets. This supersedes the instructions contained at paragraph 8.1(b)  of the aforementioned circular dated February 26, 2014.
It is reiterated that as the CRILC data is  collected under the provisions of the RBI Act, non-adherence to reporting  instructions attracts penal provisions under the Act.
Yours faithfully
(A.K. Pandey)
Chief General Manager