(209 kb)
Levy of penal charges on non-maintenance of minimum balances in savings bank accounts
RBI/2014-15/363
DBR.RRB.BC.No.55/03.05.33/2014-15
December 22, 2014
All Regional Rural Banks
Dear Sir/Madam,
Levy of penal charges on non-maintenance of  minimum balances in savings bank accounts
Please refer to our
circular  RPCD.CO.RRB.BC.No.100/03.05.33/2013-14 dated May 12, 2014
on ‘Customer  Service in Regional Rural Banks’ advising RRBs to inform customers, in a  transparent manner, regarding the requirement of minimum balance in savings  bank account and levy of penal charges for non-maintenance of the same at the  time of opening the account.
2. In this connection, a reference is invited to
paragraph  30
of Part B of First Bi-monthly Monetary Policy Statement, 2014-15  announced on April 1, 2014, regarding ‘Developmental and Regulatory Policies’  proposing certain measures towards consumer protection. One of the proposals  contained therein was that banks should not take undue advantage of customer  difficulty or inattention. Instead of levying penal charges for non-maintenance  of minimum balance in ordinary savings bank accounts, banks should limit  services available on such accounts to those available to Basic Savings Bank  Deposit Accounts and restore the services when the balances improve to the  minimum required level. A reference is also invited to the recommendations of  Damodaran Committee on customer service in banks which, inter-alia, recommended  that ‘
banks should inform the customer immediately on the balance in the  account breaching minimum balance and the applicable penal charges for not  maintaining the balance by SMS/email/letter. Further, the penal charges levied  should be in proportion to the shortfall observed’.
3. The policy announcement has been reviewed  after extensive consultation with banks. Consequent to these deliberations and  after taking into consideration the recommendation of Damodaran Committee, it  has been decided that while levying charges for non-maintenance of minimum  balance in savings bank account, RRBs shall adhere to the
additional
guidelines given in
Annex
.  The guidelines come into effect from April 1, 2015.
4. These guidelines should be brought to the  notice of all customers apart from being disclosed on the bank’s website.
5. In the meantime, all RRBs are advised to take  immediate steps to update customer information so as to facilitate sending  alerts through electronic modes (SMSs/emails etc.) for effective implementation  of the guidelines.
Yours faithfully,
(Sudha Damodar)
Chief General Manager
Annex
Levy of charges for non-maintenance of minimum  balance in savings bank account shall be subject to the following additional  guidelines:
(i) In the event of a default in maintenance of  minimum balance/average minimum balance as agreed to between the bank and  customer, the bank should notify the customer clearly by SMS/ email/ letter  etc. that in the event of the minimum balance not being restored in the account  within a month from the date of notice, penal charges will be applicable.
(ii) In case the minimum balance is not restored  within a reasonable period, which shall not be less than one month from the  date of notice of shortfall, penal charges may be recovered under intimation to  the account holder.
(iii) The policy on penal charges to be so  levied may be decided with the approval of the Board of the bank.
(iv) The penal charges should be directly  proportionate to the extent of shortfall observed. In other words, the charges  should be a fixed percentage levied on the amount of difference between the  actual balance maintained and the minimum balance as agreed upon at the time of  opening of account. A suitable slab structure for recovery of charges may be  finalized.
(v) It should be ensured that such penal charges  are reasonable and not out of line with the average cost of providing the  services.
(vi) It should be ensured that the balance in  the savings account does not turn into negative balance solely on account of  levy of charges for non-maintenance of minimum balance.