(54 kb)
Exim Bank's Line of Credit of USD 82 million to the Government of the Republic of Congo
RBI/2014-15/370
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.53
December 29, 2014
To
All  Category - I Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam  / Sir,
Exim Bank's Line of Credit of USD 82  million
to the Government of the Republic   of Congo
Export-Import Bank of India (Exim Bank) has entered into an Agreement  dated June 27, 2014 with the Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo for making available to the latter, a  Line of Credit (LOC) of USD 82 million (USD Eighty Two million) for financing  eligible goods, Machinery, equipment and services including consultancy  services from India for the purpose of financing completion of Ketende  Hydro-electric Project in Congo. The goods, machinery, equipment and services  including consultancy services from India for exports under this  Agreement are those which are eligible for export under the Foreign Trade  Policy of the Government of India and whose purchase may be agreed to be  financed by the Exim Bank under this Agreement. Out of the total credit by Exim  Bank under this Agreement, the goods and services including consultancy  services of the value of at least 75 per cent of the contract price shall be  supplied by the seller from India and the remaining 25 percent goods and  services may be procured by the seller for the purpose of Eligible Contract  from outside India.
2. The Credit Agreement under the LOC is  effective from October 8, 2014 and the date of execution of Agreement is June  27, 2013. Under the LOC, the last date for opening of Letters of Credit and  Disbursement will be 48 months from the scheduled completion date(s) of  contract(s) in the case of project exports and 72 months (June 26, 2020) from  the execution date of the Credit Agreement in the case of supply contracts.
3. Shipments under the LOC will have to be  declared on GR / SDF Forms as per instructions issued by the Reserve Bank from  time to time.
4. No agency commission is payable under the  above LOC. However, if required, the exporter may use his own resources or  utilize balances in his Exchange Earners’ Foreign Currency Account for payment  of commission in free foreign exchange. Authorised Dealer Category- l (AD  Category-l) banks may allow such remittance after realization of full payment  of contract value subject to compliance with the prevailing instructions for  payment of agency commission.
5. AD  Category-I banks may bring the contents of  this circular to the notice of their exporter constituents and advise them to  obtain full details of the Line of Credit from the Exim Bank’s office at Centre  One, Floor 21, World Trade Centre Complex, Cuffe Parade, Mumbai 400 005 or log on to
www.eximbankindia.in
.
6. The Directions contained in this  circular have been issued under sections 10(4) and 11(1) of the Foreign  Exchange Management Act (FEMA), 1999 (42 of 1999) and are without prejudice to  permissions / approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(
C.  D. Srinivasan
)
Chief General Manager