(64 kb)
Obligation of NBFCs under Prevention of Money laundering Act, 2002 - Client Due Diligence measures
RBI/2014-15/383
DNBR(PD).CC.No.009/03.10.42/2014-15
January 2, 2015
All NBFCs
Dear Sirs,
Know  your Customer (KYC) Norms/Anti-Money Laundering (AML) standards/ Combating of  Financing of Terrorism (CFT)/ Obligation of NBFCs under Prevention of Money  laundering Act (PMLA), 2002 - Client Due Diligence measures
Please  refer to our
Master  Circular DNBS(PD) CC.No.387/03.10.42/ 2014-15 July 1, 2014
, as per which NBFCs  are required to undertake  ‘Client Due Diligence’ and apply such measures to existing clients based on  risk categorisation. The periodicity of such updation should not be less than  once in five years in the case of low risk category customers and not less than  once in two years in case of high and medium risk categories.
2. The issue has been reviewed in the light of practical difficulties/constraints  expressed in obtaining/submitting fresh KYC documents at frequent intervals as  the relative documents submitted earlier specially by low-risk customers have  remained unchanged in most of the accounts. Accordingly, it has been decided to  amend the instructions as under:
NBFCs  would need to continue to carry out on-going due diligence with respect to the  business relationship with every client and closely examine the transactions in  order to ensure that they are consistent with their knowledge of the client,  his business and risk profile and, wherever necessary, the source of funds.
Full  KYC exercise will be required to be done at least every two years for high risk  individuals and entities.
Full  KYC exercise will be required to be done at least every ten years for low risk  and at least every eight years for medium risk individuals and entities taking  in to account whether and when client due diligence measures have previously  been undertaken and the adequacy of data obtained. Physical presence of the  clients may, however, not be insisted upon at the time of such periodic  updations.
Fresh photographs will be required to be  obtained from minor customer on becoming major.
3.  Further NBFCs (i) need not seek fresh proofs of identity and address  at the time of periodic updation, from those customers who are categorised as  ‘low risk’, in case of no change in status with respect to their identities and  addresses. A self-certification by the customer to that effect should suffice  in such cases. In case of change of address of such ‘low risk’ customers, they  could merely forward a certified copy of the document (proof of address) by  mail/post, etc.
(ii)  If an existing KYC compliant customer of NBFC desires to open another account  in the same NBFC, there should be no need for submission of fresh proof of  identity and/or proof of address for the purpose.
4. NBFCs may revise  their KYC policy in the light of the above instructions and ensure strict  adherence to the same.
Yours faithfully,
(Sindhu Pancholy)
Deputy General Manager