(222 kb)
Risk Management and Inter Bank Dealings: Hedging under Past Performance Route- Liberalisation of Documentation Requirements in the OTC market
RBI/2014-15/401
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.58
January 14, 2015
To
All Category - I Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam / Sir,
Risk Management and Inter Bank Dealings: Hedging under Past Performance  Route- Liberalisation of Documentation Requirements in the OTC market
Attention of Authorised Dealers Category-I (AD Category-I) banks  is invited to the Foreign Exchange Management (Foreign Exchange Derivative  Contracts) Regulations, 2000 dated May 3, 2000 (
Notification  No. FEMA/25/RB-2000 dated May 3, 2000
) as amended from time to time and
A.P.  (DIR Series) circular no. 32 dated December 28, 2010
, as amended from time  to time.
2.  In order to further rationalise the documentation process for exporters and  importers relating to hedging of probable exposures based on past performance,  the extant guidelines in this regard have been revised as follows:
a) In  terms of paragraph (2)(g)(ii) of section B contained in the annex to the above  circular, importers and exporters are required to furnish a quarterly  declaration, as per Appendix M, duly certified by the Statutory Auditor, to the  AD Category I banks regarding amounts booked with other AD Category I banks  under this facility. It has now been decided that importers and exporters shall,  henceforth, be required to furnish a quarterly declaration to the same effect as  per the format in
Annex I
to this circular signed by the Chief  Financial Officer (CFO) and the Company Secretary (CS). In the absence of a CS,  the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) or the Chief Operating Officer (COO) shall co-sign the undertaking along with the CFO.
b) Further, in terms of paragraph (2)(g)(iv),  aggregate outstanding contracts in excess of 50 per cent of the eligible limit  may be permitted by AD Category I banks on being satisfied about the genuine  requirements of their customers after examination of the following documents:
A certificate from  the Statutory Auditor of the customer that all guidelines have been adhered to  while utilizing this facility; and
A  certificate of import/export turnover of the customer during the past three  years duly certified by their Statutory Auditor in the format given in Appendix  K.
It has now  been decided that, henceforth, AD Category I banks may permit aggregate  outstanding contracts in excess of 50 per cent of the eligible limit on being  satisfied about the genuine requirements of their customers after examination  of a document as per the format in
Annex II
to this circular, signed by the CFO and CS, containing the following:
A declaration that  all guidelines have been adhered to while utilizing this facility; and
A  certificate of import/export turnover of the customer during the past three  years.
In the absence of a CS, the CEO or the COO shall co-sign the undertaking  along with the CFO.
c) As part of the annual audit exercise, the  Statutory Auditor shall also certify the following:
The amounts booked with AD Category-I  banks under this facility; and
All  guidelines have been adhered to while utilizing this facility over the past  financial year.
3. All other operational guidelines, terms and conditions shall remain  unchanged.
4. AD Category-I banks may bring the contents of this circular to the  notice of their constituents and customers.
5. The directions contained in this circular have been issued under  Sections 10(4) and 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of  1999) and are without prejudice to permissions/ approvals, if any, required  under any other law.
Yours faithfully
(Dimple Bhandia)
General Manager-in-Charge
Annex I
Format of Declaration of amounts booked/cancelled under Past Performance  facility
[On letterhead of the Company]
Date:
To,
(Name and address of the Bank)
Dear  Sir,
Sub: Declaration of amounts booked/cancelled under Past Performance  facility
We refer to the facility of booking of Forward or Option Contracts  involving Foreign Exchange, based on the past performance facility with  Authorised Dealer Category I Banks (AD Category I Banks), more specifically in  relation to the undertaking submitted by us to you, dated [ ] in this regard  ("Undertaking").
In accordance with the said Undertaking, we hereby furnish a declaration  regarding the amounts of the transactions booked by us with all AD Category I  banks.
We are availing the past performance limit with the following AD  Category I banks:
………………………………….
Please find below the information regarding amounts booked / cancelled with  all AD Category I Banks under the said past performance facility as permitted  under the FEMA, 1999 Regulations :
(Amount in US Dollar)
Eligible limit under past performance
Aggregate amount of contracts booked with    all the ADs from April till date
Amount of contracts cancelled with all ADs    from April till date _______
Amount of contracts o/s with all ADs as on    date
Amount utilised (by delivery of documents)    as on date
Available limits under past performance as    on date
Thanking you,
Yours faithfully,
For  XXXXXX
(Chief Financial Officer)                          (Company Secretary)
Annex II
Format for Declaration for utilisation of past performance limits in  excess of 50 per cent and
details of import / export turnover, overdues, etc.
[On letterhead of the Company]
Date:
To,
(Name  and address of the Bank)
Dear  Sir,
Sub: Declaration for utilisation of past performance limits in excess of  50 per cent and details of import / export turnover, overdues, etc.
The value of the outstanding forward  cover availed by us under the past performance route as on [date] is [  ] per cent of our eligibility for our imports  [exports].
We certify that all guidelines in  respect of hedging of probable exposures under the past performance route have  been complied with while utilizing this facility.
We  declare that the information in the table below is true to the best of our  knowledge and is provided in support of our application to hedge our currency  risk under the past performance route using permitted foreign exchange  derivative contracts in terms of Regulations and Guidelines issued under FEMA,  1999 (Act 42 of 1999).
(Amount in USD million)
Financial Year
(April-March)
Turnover
Percentage of overdue bills to    turnover
Existing limit for booking of    forward cover based on past performance
Import
Export
Import
Export
Export
Import
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Yours faithfully,
For  XXXXXX
(Chief Financial Officer)                          (Company Secretary)