(126 kb)
Entry of Banks into Insurance Business
RBI/2014-2015/409
DBR.No.FSD.BC.62/24.01.018/2014-15
January 15, 2015
All  Scheduled Commercial Banks
(excluding RRBs)
Dear  Sir/ Madam,
Entry of Banks into Insurance Business
Please  refer to our
Circular DBOD.No.FSC.BC.16/24.01.018/2000-2001 dated August 9, 2000
which,
inter alia,
permitted banks to set up insurance joint ventures on  risk participation basis and also to undertake insurance business as agents of  insurance companies on fee basis, without any risk participation by banks and  their subsidiaries, consequent to the notification of Government of India  specifying “Insurance” as a permissible form of business that could be  undertaken by banks under Section 6(1)(o) of the Banking Regulation Act,1949.  Subsequently, banks were also permitted to undertake referral activities vide  our
circular DBOD.No.FSC.BC.27/24.01.018/2003-04 dated September 22,  2003
.
2. With the  objective of increasing insurance penetration using the entire network of bank  branches, the Finance Minister in the budget speech 2013-14 announced that  banks will be permitted to act as insurance brokers. Consequent to the announcement, IRDA formulated and  notified the IRDA (Licensing of Banks as Insurance Brokers) Regulations, 2013  to enable banks to take up the business of insurance broking departmentally.  Reserve Bank of India had also issued
Draft Guidelines on Entry of Banks into Insurance Business-  Insurance Broking Business on  November 29, 2013
for public comments. Taking into account the comments  received from various stakeholders in response to the draft guidelines, the guidelines have now been finalized.
3. Accordingly,  the extant instructions on conduct of insurance business by banks have been  reviewed. It is advised that banks may undertake insurance business by setting up  a subsidiary/joint venture, as well as undertake insurance broking/ insurance  agency/either departmentally or through a subsidiary subject to the conditions given  in the Annex. However, it may be noted  that if a bank or its group entities, including subsidiaries, undertake insurance  distribution through either broking or corporate agency mode, the bank/other group entities would not be  permitted to undertake insurance distribution activities, ie, only one entity  in the group can undertake insurance distribution by either one of the two modes mentioned above.
4.
i) Banks setting up a  subsidiary/JV for undertaking insurance business with risk participation
Banks are not allowed to undertake insurance business with risk  participation departmentally and may do so only through a subsidiary/JV set up for  the purpose. Banks which satisfy the eligibility criteria (as on March 31 of  the previous year) given below may approach Reserve Bank of India to set up a subsidiary/joint  venture company for undertaking insurance business with risk participation:
a) The  net worth of the bank should not be less than Rs.1000 crore;
b) The CRAR of the bank should not be less than  10 per cent;
c) The level of net non-performing assets  should be not more than 3 percent.
d) The bank should have made a net profit for  the last three continuous years;
e) The  track record of the performance of the subsidiaries, if any, of the   concerned  bank should be satisfactory.
RBI  approval would factor in regulatory and supervisory comfort on various aspects  of the bank’s functioning such as corporate governance, risk management, etc.
It  may be noted that a subsidiary of a bank and another bank will not normally be  allowed to contribute to the equity of the insurance company on risk  participation basis.
It  should be also be ensured that risks involved in insurance business do not get  transferred to the bank and that the banking business does not get contaminated  by any risks which may arise from insurance business. There should be an ‘arms  length’ relationship between the bank and the insurance outfit.
ii) Banks undertaking insurance broking/corporate agency through a  subsidiary/JV
Banks require prior approval of RBI for setting up a subsidiary/JV.  Accordingly, banks desirous of setting up a subsidiary for undertaking  insurance broking/corporate agency and which  satisfy the eligibility criteria (as on March 31 of the previous year) given below  may approach Reserve Bank of India for approval to set up such  subsidiary/JV:
a) The net worth of the bank should not be less  than Rs.500 crore
after
investing in the equity of such company;
b) The CRAR of the bank should not be less  than 10 per cent;
c) The level of net non-performing assets  should be not more than 3 per cent.
d) The bank should have made a net profit for  the last three continuous years;
e) The track record of the performance of the  subsidiaries, if any, of the concerned bank should be satisfactory.
As  hitherto, RBI approval would also factor in regulatory and supervisory comfort  on various aspects of the bank’s functioning such as corporate governance, risk  management, etc.
5. Banks undertaking corporate agency functions/broking  functions departmentally
Banks need not obtain prior approval of the RBI to act as corporate  agents on fee basis, without risk participation/undertake insurance broking  activities departmentally, subject to IRDA Regulations, and compliance with the  conditions given in the
Annex
.
6. Banks undertaking referral  services
In terms of IRDA (Sharing of Database for Distribution of  Insurance Products) Regulations 2010, no bank is presently eligible to conduct  insurance referral business.
7.  In view of the stipulations  contained in this circular, we advise that the instructions contained in our  circulars DBOD.No.FSC.BC.16/24.01.018/2000-2001 dated August 9, 2000 and DBOD.No.FSC.BC.27/24.01.018/2003-04  dated September 22, 2003 on
Entry of Banks into Insurance Business
stand  withdrawn.
Yours faithfully
(Sudarshan  Sen)
Chief  General Manager-In-Charge
Encl:
As above
Annex
Guidelines  for Banks undertaking Insurance Broking and Agency Business
Banks may undertake insurance agency  or broking business departmentally and/or through subsidiary, subject  to the following stipulations:
1. Board Approved Policy
A  comprehensive Board approved policy regarding undertaking insurance distribution,  whether under the agency or the broking model should be formulated and services  should be offered to customers in accordance with this policy. The policy will  also encompass issues of customer appropriateness and suitability as well as  grievance redressal. It may be noted that as  IRDA Guidelines do not permit group entities to take up both corporate agency  and broking in the same group even through separate entities, banks or their  group entities may undertake either insurance broking or corporate agency  business.
2. Compliance with IRDA  guidelines
a) The IRDA (Licensing of Corporate Agents) Regulations, 2002/ IRDA (Licensing of Banks as Insurance Brokers) Regulations, 2013 and  the code of conduct prescribed by IRDA, as amended from time to time, as  applicable, should be complied with by  banks undertaking these activities.
b) The deposit to be maintained by  an insurance broker as per the IRDA (Licensing of Banks as Insurance Brokers)  Regulations, 2013, as amended from time to time, should be maintained with a  scheduled commercial bank other than itself.
3. Ensuring Customer  Appropriateness and Suitability
While undertaking  insurance distribution business, either under the corporate agency or broking  model under the relevant IRDA Regulations, banks must keep the following in  view:
a) All employees dealing with  insurance agency/ broking business should possess the requisite qualification  prescribed by IRDA.
b)  There should be a system of assessment of the suitability of products for  customers. Pure risk term products with no investment or growth components that  are simple and easy for the customer to understand will be deemed universally suitable products. More  complex products with investment components will require the bank to necessarily  undertake a customer need assessment prior to sale. It should be ensured  that there is a standardized system of assessing the needs of the customer and  that initiation/transactional and approval processes are segregated.
c) Banks should treat their customers  fairly, honestly and transparently, with regard to suitability and  appropriateness of the insurance product sold.
4. Prohibition on Payment of  Commission/Incentive directly to Bank Staff
There should be no violation either of  Section 10(1)(ii) of the BR Act, 1949 or the guidelines issued by IRDA in  payment of commissions/brokerage/incentives. This may be factored in while  formulating a suitable performance assessment and incentive structure for  staff.  Further, it must be ensured that no incentive (cash or non-cash)  should be paid to the staff engaged in insurance broking/corporate agency services by the insurance company.
5. Adherence to KYC Guidelines
The instructions/ guidelines on  KYC/AML/CFT applicable to banks, issued by RBI from time to time, may be  adhered to, in respect of customers (both existing and walk-in) to whom the  services of insurance broking/agency are being provided.
6. Transparency and Disclosures
a) The bank should not follow any  restrictive practices of forcing a customer to either opt for products of a  specific insurance company or link sale of such products to any banking  product. It should be prominently stated in all publicity material distributed  by the bank that the purchase by a bank’s customer of any insurance products is  purely voluntary, and is not linked to availment of any other facility from the  bank.
b)  Further, the details of fees/ brokerage received in respect of  insurance broking/agency business undertaken by them should be disclosed in the  ‘Notes to Accounts’ to their Balance Sheet.
7. Customer Grievance Redressal Mechanism
A  robust internal grievance redressal mechanism should be put in place along with  a Board approved customer compensation policy for resolving issues related to  services offered. It must also ensure that the insurance companies whose  products are being sold have robust customer grievance redressal arrangements  in place. Further, the bank must facilitate the redressal of grievances.
8. Penal Action for Violation  of Guidelines
Violation of the above instructions will be viewed seriously and will invite  deterrent penal action against the banks.