(219 kb)
Interest Rates on Advances
RBI/2014-15/414
DBR.Dir.BC.No.63/13.03.00/2014-15
January 19, 2015
All Scheduled Commercial Banks
(Excluding RRBs)
Dear Sir/Madam
Interest Rates on Advances
A reference is invited to our
circulars  DBOD.No.Dir.BC.88/13.03.00/2009-10 dated April 9, 2010
on ‘Guidelines on  the Base Rate’ and
DBOD.No.Dir.BC.47/13.03.00/  2013-14 dated September 2, 2013
on ‘Base Rate- Revised Guidelines’.
2. Based on the recommendations of the Working  Group on pricing of Credit (Chair: Shri Anand Sinha), banks are now advised to adhere  to the additional guidelines on ‘Interest Rates on Advances’ as indicated in  the
‘Annex’
.
3. The  guidelines will come into effect one month from the date of this circular.
Yours faithfully,
(Lily Vadera)
Chief General Manager
Annex
Computation of Base Rate
While computing Base Rate, banks will have the  freedom to calculate cost of funds either on the basis of average cost of funds  or on marginal cost of funds or any other methodology in vogue, which is  reasonable and transparent provided it is consistent and made available for  supervisory review/scrutiny as and when required. It is clarified here that  where the card rate for deposits of one or more tenor is the basis, the  deposits in the chosen tenor/s should have the largest share in the deposit  base of the bank.
Review of Base Rate
As hitherto, banks are required to review the Base  Rate at least once in a quarter with the approval of the Board or the Asset  Liability Management Committee (ALCO) as per the bank’s practice.
Review of Base Rate methodology
(i) With a view to providing banks greater  operational flexibility, it has been decided to allow banks to review the Base  Rate methodology after three years from date of its finalization instead of the  current periodicity of five years. Accordingly, banks may change their Base  Rate methodology after completion of prescribed period with the approval of  their Board of Directors/ ALCO.
(ii) Banks will, however, not be allowed to change  their methodology during the review cycle.
Spread
(i) Banks should  have a Board approved policy delineating the components of spread charged to a  customer. It should be ensured that any price differentiation is consistent  with bank’s credit pricing policy.
(ii) Bank’s internal pricing policy must spell out  the rationale for, and range of, the spread in the case of a given category of  borrower, as also, the delegation of powers in respect of loan pricing. The  rationale of the policy should be available for supervisory review.
(iii) The spread charged  to an existing borrower should not be increased except on account of  deterioration in the credit risk profile of the customer or change in the tenor  premium. Any such decision regarding change in spread on account of change in  credit risk profile should be supported by a full-fledged risk profile review  of the customer. The change in tenor premium should not be borrower specific or  loan class specific. In other words, the change in tenor premium will be  uniform for all types of loans for a given residual tenor.
(iv) The guidelines contained in sub-paragraph  (iii) above are, however, not applicable to loans under consortium/ multiple  banking arrangements.