(206 kb)
External Commercial Borrowings (ECB) Policy – Simplification of Procedure
RBI/2014-15/425
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular  No.64
January  23, 2015
To
The  Authorised Dealer Category-I Banks
Madam  / Dear Sir
External  Commercial Borrowings (ECB) Policy – Simplification of Procedure
Attention  of the Authorised Dealer (AD) Category-I banks is invited to the following  provisions contained in the undernoted A.P. (DIR Series) Circulars through  which powers have been delegated to them to deal with cases related to change in draw-down and repayment  schedules of ECBs subject to conditions stipulated therein:
Provisions contained in the paragraph 3 (a)  of
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 33 dated February 09, 2010
Provisions contained in paragraphs 3 (a) and  (b) of
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 75 dated February 07, 2012
Provisions contained in the
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 128 dated May 09, 2014
.
2.  On a review, as a measure of simplification of the existing procedure for  rescheduling / restructuring of ECBs and in supersession of aforesaid  provisions, it has been decided to delegate powers to the designated AD  Category-I banks to allow:
Changes / modifications (irrespective of the  number of occasions) in the draw-down and repayment schedules of the ECB  whether associated with change in the average maturity period or not and / or  with changes (increase/decrease) in the all-in-cost.
Reduction in the amount of ECB (irrespective  of the number of occasions) along with any changes in draw-down and repayment  schedules, average maturity period and all-in-cost.
Increase in all-in-cost of ECB, irrespective of  the number of occasions.
3.  This measure is subject to the designated AD Category-I bank ensuring the  following:
Revised average maturity period and / or  all-in-cost is / are in conformity with the applicable ceilings / guidelines;  and
The changes are effected during the tenure of  the ECB.
4.  If the lender is an overseas branch / subsidiary of an Indian bank, the changes  shall be subject to the applicable prudential norms.
5.  It has also been decided to delegate powers to the designated AD Category-I  banks to permit changes in the name of the lender of ECB after satisfying  themselves with the bonafides of the transactions and ensuring that the ECB  continues to be in compliance with applicable guidelines. Further, the AD Category-I  banks may also allow the cases requiring transfer of the ECB from one company  to another on account of re-organisation at the borrower’s level in the form of  merger / demerger / amalgamation / acquisition duly as per the applicable laws  / rules after satisfying themselves that the company acquiring the ECB is an  eligible borrower and ECB continues to be in compliance with applicable  guidelines.
6.  These measures of simplification will be applicable for ECBs raised both under  the automatic and approval routes. FCCBs will, however, not be covered within  these provisions.
7.  These changes in the terms and conditions of ECB and / or any other changes  allowed by the AD Category-I banks under the powers already delegated and / or  changes approved by the Reserve Bank should be reported to the Department of  Statistics and Information Management (DSIM) of the Reserve Bank through  revised Form 83 at the earliest, in any case not later than 7 days from the  changes effected. While submitting revised Form 83 to the DSIM, the changes  should be specifically mentioned in the communication. Further, these changes  should also get reflected in the ECB 2 returns appropriately.
8.  The modification to the ECB policy will come into force with immediate effect.  All other aspects of the ECB policy shall remain unchanged.
9.  AD Category-I banks may bring the contents of this Circular to the notice of  their constituents and customers.
10.  The directions contained in this Circular have been issued under sections 10(4)  and 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and are  without prejudice to permissions / approvals required, if any, under any other  law.
Yours  faithfully
B P  Kanungo
Principal  Chief General Manager