(15 kb)
Anti-Money Laundering (AML) standards/Combating the Financing of Terrorism (CFT) Standards - Cross Border Inward Remittance under Money Transfer Service Scheme
RBI/2014-15/432
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.67
January 28, 2015
To,
All Authorised Persons, who are Indian Agents  under Money Transfer Service Scheme.
Madam/ Dear Sir,
Anti-Money Laundering (AML) standards/Combating  the Financing of Terrorism (CFT) Standards - Cross Border Inward Remittance  under Money Transfer Service Scheme
Please refer to our
A.P.(DIR Series) Circular No.35 dated September  04, 2013
on  risks arising from the deficiencies in AML/CFT regime of certain jurisdictions.
2. Financial Action Task Force (FATF) has  updated its Statement on the subject and document 'Improving Global AML/CFT  Compliance: on-going process' on October 24, 2014. The statement /document can  be accessed from the following URLs :
http://www.fatf-gafi.org/documents/documents/fatf-compliance-oct-2014.html
and
http://www.fatf-gafi.org/topics/high-riskandnon-cooperativejurisdictions/documents/public-statement-oct2014.html
3. Authorised Persons (Indian Agents) are  accordingly advised to consider the information contained in the enclosed  statement.
4. This, however, does not preclude Authorised  Persons (Indian Agents) from legitimate transactions with these countries and  jurisdictions.
5. These guidelines would also be applicable  mutatis mutandis to all Sub-Agents of the Indian Agents under MTSS and it will  be the sole responsibility of the APs (Indian Agents) to ensure that their  Sub-agents also adhere to these guidelines.
6. Authorised Persons (Indian Agents) may bring  the contents of this circular to the notice of their constituents concerned.
7. The directions contained in this  Circular have been issued under Section 10(4) and Section 11(1) of the Foreign  Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and also under the, Prevention of  Money Laundering Act, (PMLA), 2002, as amended by Prevention of Money  Laundering (Amendment) Act, 2009 and Prevention of Money-Laundering  (Maintenance of Records of the Nature and Value of Transactions, the Procedure  and Manner of Maintaining and Time for Furnishing Information and Verification  and Maintenance of Records of the Identity of the Clients of the Banking  Companies, Financial Institutions and Intermediaries) Rules, 2005 as amended  from time to time and are without prejudice to permission/approvals, if any,  required under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(B P Kanungo)
Principal Chief General Manager