(21 kb)
Anti-Money Laundering (AML) standards/Combating the Financing of Terrorism (CFT) Standards - Money changing activities
RBI/2014-15/433
A.P.(DIR  Series) Circular No.68
January  28, 2015
To,
All  Authorised Persons
Madam/  Dear Sir,
Anti-Money  Laundering (AML) standards/Combating the Financing of Terrorism (CFT) Standards  - Money changing activities
Please  refer to our
A.P.(DIR  Series) Circular No. 34 dated September 04, 2013
on risks arising from the deficiencies  in AML/CFT regime of certain jurisdiction.
2.  Financial Action Task Force (FATF) has updated its Statement on the subject and  document 'Improving Global AML/CFT Compliance: on-going process' on October 24,  2014. The statement /document can be accessed from the following 
      URLs :
http://www.fatf-gafi.org/documents/documents/fatf-compliance-oct-2014.html
and
http://www.fatf-gafi.org/topics/high-riskandnon-cooperativejurisdictions/documents/public-statement-oct2014.html
3.  Authorised Persons are accordingly advised to consider the information  contained in the enclosed statement.
4.  This, however, does not preclude Authorised Persons from legitimate  transactions with these countries and jurisdictions.
5.  These guidelines are also applicable mutatis mutandis to all agents/  franchisees of Authorised Persons and it will be the sole responsibility of the  franchisers to ensure that their agents / franchisees also adhere to these  guidelines.
6.  Authorised Persons may bring the contents of this circular to the notice of  their constituents concerned.
7.  The directions contained in this Circular have been issued under Section 10(4)  and Section 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and  also under the, Prevention of Money Laundering Act, (PMLA), 2002, as amended by  Prevention of Money Laundering (Amendment) Act, 2009 and Prevention of  Money-Laundering (Maintenance of Records of the Nature and Value of  Transactions, the Procedure and Manner of Maintaining and Time for Furnishing  Information and Verification and Maintenance of Records of the Identity of the  Clients of the Banking Companies, Financial Institutions and Intermediaries)  Rules, 2005 as amended from time to time and are without prejudice to  permission /approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours  faithfully,
(B  P Kanungo)
Principal  Chief General Manager