(73 kb)
Foreign investment in India by Foreign Portfolio Investors
RBI/2014-15/460
A. P.  (DIR Series) Circular No.73
February  06, 2015
To,
All  Authorised Persons
Madam/  Sir,
Foreign investment in India by Foreign Portfolio  Investors
Attention  of AD Category-I banks is invited to the announcement in the
Sixth  Bi-Monthly Monetary Policy  Statement, 2014-15
, issued on February 03, 2015 and
A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 71 dated February 03, 2015
in terms of which all  future investments by registered Foreign Portfolio Investors (FPIs) in the debt  market in India will be required to be made with a minimum residual maturity of  three years.
2. In this context, the Reserve  Bank has been receiving some enquiries about the applicability of the aforesaid directions. The queries  raised and our clarifications thereon are as under:
a.
Query:
The applicability of the directions to investment by FPIs  in commercial papers (CPs).
Clarification:
In terms of the  aforesaid directions, any fresh investments shall be permitted in any type of  debt instrument in India with a minimum residual maturity of three years.  Accordingly, FPIs shall not be allowed to make any further investment in CPs.
b.
Query:
The applicability of  these guidelines on debt instruments having maturity of three years and over  but with optionality clause of less than three years.
Clarification:
FPIs shall not be  allowed to make any further investments in debt instruments having minimum initial  / residual maturity of three years with optionality clause exercisable within three  years.
c.
Query:
The applicability of  these guidelines on amortised debt instruments having average maturity of three  years and above.
Clarification:
FPIs shall be permitted  to invest in amortised debt instruments provided  the duration of the instrument is three years and above.
3. Any arrangement that negates any of the above shall not be in conformity  with the provisions of the A.P.  (DIR Series) Circular No. 71 dated February 03, 2015.
4. AD Category – I banks may bring the contents of this circular to the  notice of their constituents and customers concerned.
5. The directions contained in this circular have been issued under sections  10(4) and 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and  are without prejudice to permissions / approvals, if any, required under any  other law.
Yours  faithfully,
(B. P.  Kanungo)
Principal  Chief General Manager