(87 kb)
Exim Bank's Line of Credit of USD 22.50 million to the Government of the Republic of Gambia
RBI//2014-15/464
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.75
February 11, 2015
To
All Category - I Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam / Sir,
Exim Bank's Line of Credit of USD 22.50  million
to the Government of the Republic of Gambia
Export-Import Bank of India (Exim Bank) has entered into an Agreement  dated October 29, 2014 with the Government of the Republic of Gambia for making available to the latter, a Line  of Credit (LOC) of USD 22.50 million (USD Twenty two million Five hundred  thousand) for financing eligible goods, machinery, equipment and services  including consultancy services from India for the purpose of financing  electrification expansion project for the greater Banjul Area in the Gambia.  The goods, machinery, equipment and services including consultancy services  from India  for exports under this Agreement are those which are eligible  for export under the Foreign Trade Policy of the Government of India and whose  purchase may be agreed to be financed by the Exim Bank under this Agreement.  Out of the total credit by Exim Bank under this Agreement, the goods and  services including consultancy services of the value of at least 75 per cent of  the contract price shall be supplied by the seller from India and the remaining  25 percent goods and services may be procured by the seller for the purpose of  Eligible Contract from outside India.
2. The Credit Agreement under the LOC is  effective from December 26, 2014 and the date of execution of Agreement is  October 29, 2014. Under the LOC, the last date for opening of Letters of Credit  and Disbursement will be 48 months from the scheduled completion date of  contract in the case of Project exports and 72 months (October 28, 2020) from  the execution date of the Credit Agreement in the case of supply contracts.
3. Shipments under the LOC will have to be  declared on EDF/ SDF Forms as per instructions issued by the Reserve Bank from  time to time.
4. No agency commission is payable under the  above LOC. However, if required, the exporter may use his own resources or  utilize balances in his Exchange Earners’ Foreign Currency Account for payment  of commission in free foreign exchange. Authorised Dealer Category- l (AD  Category-l) banks may allow such remittance after realization of full payment  of contract value subject to compliance with the prevailing instructions for  payment of agency commission.
5. AD  Category-I banks may bring the contents of  this circular to the notice of their exporter constituents and advise them to  obtain full details of the Line of Credit from the Exim Bank’s office at Centre  One, Floor 21, World Trade Centre Complex, Cuffe Parade, Mumbai 400 005 or log on to
www.eximbankindia.in
6. The Directions contained in this  circular have been issued under sections 10(4) and 11(1) of the Foreign  Exchange Management Act (FEMA), 1999 (42 of 1999) and are without prejudice to  permissions / approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours  faithfully,
(
C. D.  Srinivasan
)
Chief General Manager