(392 kb)
Bank’s prior approval for change in shareholding
RBI/2014-2015/476
DNBR(PD)CC.No.  01/SCRC/26.03.001/2014-2015
February  24, 2015
The  Chairman / Managing Director /
Chief  Executive Officer
All  Registered Securitisation Companies /
Reconstruction  Companies
Dear  Sir,
Bank’s  prior approval for change in shareholding
In  terms of Section 3(6) of the SARFAESI Act, 2002, every Securitisation Company /  Reconstruction Company (SC / RC) is required to  obtain prior approval of the Reserve Bank for any substantial change in  its management. For the purpose of this section, the expression “substantial  change in management” means the change in the management by way of transfer of  shares or amalgamation or transfer of the business of the company. Hence, one of the terms and conditions  stipulated to the SC/RCs, while granting them the Certificate of Registration,  states that prior approval of Reserve Bank will have to be taken by the SC/RCs  for any change in their shareholding pattern.
2. In order to smoothen the functioning of SC/RC  companies, it has been decided that, henceforth only the following changes in  the share holding pattern of the SC/RC will require Reserve Bank’s prior  approval:
any transfer of shares by which the transferee  becomes a sponsor.
any transfer of shares by which the transferor  ceases to be a sponsor.
an aggregate transfer of ten percent or more of  the total paid up share capital of the SC/RC by a sponsor during the period of  five years commencing from the date of certificate of registration.
3. All other terms and conditions as stipulated  to the SC/RC, while granting them the Certificate of Registration, will  continue to apply.
4. SCs/RCs may note the above instructions for meticulous compliance.
5. A
notification DNBR(PD-SC/RC).No.01/CGM(CDS)/2014-2015 dated February 24,  2015
, amending ‘The Securitisation Companies and Reconstruction Companies  (Reserve Bank) Guidelines and Directions, 2003’ is enclosed.
Yours  sincerely,
(C D Srinivasan)
Chief  General Manager
Reserve Bank of India
Department of  Non-Banking Regulation
Central Office
World Trade Centre
Mumbai 400 005
Notification DNBR(PD-SC/RC) No. 01/CGM (CDS)/ 2014-2015  dated February 24, 2015
The  Reserve Bank of India, having considered it necessary in the public interest,  and being satisfied that, for the purpose of enabling the Reserve Bank to  regulate the financial system to the advantage of the country and to prevent  the affairs of any Securitisation Company or Reconstruction Company from being  conducted in a manner detrimental to the interest of investors or in any manner  prejudicial to the interest of such Securitisation Company or Reconstruction  Company, in exercise of the powers conferred under Section 3, 9, 12 and 13 of  the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of  Security Interest Act, 2002, hereby directs that 'The Securitisation Companies  and Reconstruction Companies (Reserve Bank) Guidelines and Directions, 2003'  contained in
Notification  No.DNBS.2/CGM(CSM)-2003 dated April 23, 2003
(hereinafter  called directions) shall stand amended with immediate effect, as follows :-
2. Insertion  of new paragraph 24
After  paragraph 23, the following paragraph 24 shall be inserted
“24. Bank’s prior approval for any substantial  change in management by way of transfer of shares”
Notwithstanding  anything to the contrary contained in the terms and conditions stipulated in  the certificate of registration issued under section 3 of the Act, SC/RCs shall  obtain prior approval of Reserve Bank for transfers that result in substantial  change in management in the following cases only-
any  transfer of shares by which the transferee becomes a sponsor.
any  transfer of shares by which the transferor ceases to be a sponsor.
an  aggregate transfer of ten percent or more of the total paid up share capital of  the SC/RC by a sponsor during the period of five years commencing from the date  of certificate of registration.
Explanation:-  For the purposes of this clause, a transfer shall be deemed to be a transfer of  more than ten percent of the total paid up share capital of the SC/RC if the  aggregate of all the transfer of shares made by the sponsor prior to that  transfer, and including that transfer, is 10% or more of the total paid up  share capital of the SC/RC.
(C D Srinivasan)
Chief  General Manager