(283 kb)
Unclaimed Deposits / Inoperative Accounts in Banks Display list of Inoperative Accounts
RBI/2014-15/481
DCBR.BPD.(PCB/RCB).Cir.No.18/13.01.000/2014-15
February 27, 2015
The Chief Executive Officers of
All Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks/
State and Central Co-operative Banks
Madam/ Dear Sir,
Unclaimed Deposits /  Inoperative Accounts in Banks
Display list of  Inoperative Accounts
Please refer to our
Circular UBD.BPD.(PCB).Cir.No.9/13.01.000/2008-09  dated September 1, 2008
and
RPCD.CO.RF.BC.No.89/07.38.01/2008-09  dated February 18, 2009
, wherein detailed instructions have  been given to banks on dealing with unclaimed deposits / inoperative accounts.  They have been advised to find the whereabouts of the customers and their legal  heirs. These instructions, inter alia, include i) annual review of accounts in  which there are no operations, ii) operations in such accounts to be allowed  after due diligence and iii) no charge to be levied for activation of  inoperative account, etc.
2. Keeping  in view public interest, it has been decided that banks should, in addition to  the instructions contained in the above mentioned circulars, play a more  pro-active role in finding the whereabouts of the accountholders of unclaimed  deposits / inoperative accounts. Banks having websites, are therefore advised  that they should display the list of unclaimed deposits / inoperative accounts  which are inactive / inoperative for ten years or more on their respective  websites. Those banks which do not have their websites should make available  the list in their respective branches. The list so displayed on the websites/ available  in the branches must contain only the names of the account holder(s) and his /  her address in respect of unclaimed deposits / inoperative accounts. In case  such accounts are not in the name of individuals, the names of individuals  authorized to operate the accounts should also be indicated. However, the  account number, its type and the name of the branch (not applicable in case of  unit banks) shall not be disclosed on the bank's website. The list so published  by the banks on their websites should also provide a
"Find"
option to enable the public to search the list of accounts by name of the  account holder.
3. State Co-operative  Banks/ Central Co-operative Banks have already been advised vide our
circular RPCD.No.RRB.RCB.BC.58/03.05.033/2011-12  dated February 8, 2012
to display the list of unclaimed  deposits/ inoperative accounts which are inactive / inoperative for ten years  or more on their respective websites. They were advised to complete the action  by June 30, 2012 and keep their websites updated at regular intervals.
4. Banks may also refer  to
circular DBOD.No.DEAF Cell.BC.114/30.01.002/2013-14  dated May 27, 2014
on the Depositor Education and Awareness  Fund Scheme, 2014 (Scheme) notified by Government of India. In terms of  Paragraph 3(vi) of the Scheme, a bank shall calculate the cumulative balances  in all such accounts, as on the day prior to the effective date and transfer  the amount to the Depositor Education and Awareness Fund (Fund) on the last working  day of subsequent month along with the interest accrued. Subsequently, as  mentioned in paragraph 3(vii) of the Scheme, banks shall transfer to the Fund  the amounts becoming due in each calendar month (i.e. proceeds of the  inoperative accounts and balances remaining unclaimed for ten years or more) as  specified in the Scheme and the interest accrued thereon on the last working  day of the subsequent month.
5. Banks should also  give on the same website/ display in their branch, the information about the  process of claiming the unclaimed deposit/activating the inoperative account  and the necessary forms and documents for claiming the same. Banks are required  to have adequate operational safeguards to ensure that the claimants are  genuine.
6. The list of  unclaimed deposits / inoperative accounts which are inactive / inoperative for  ten years or more should be updated at least on a monthly basis by:
adding the names and  address of the account holders whose deposits have been transferred to the Depositor  Education and Awareness Fund (Fund) during the month/period.
deleting the names  and address of account holders whose claim were admitted by the banks during  the month/period. Banks need not wait for refund from the Fund for deleting the  names.
7. All UCBs and those  StCBs/CCBs who have not yet completed the action are advised to complete action  as above by June 30, 2015.
Yours faithfully,
(Suma Varma)
Principal Chief  General Manager