(64 kb)
Exim Bank's Line of Credit of USD 198.96 million to the Myanma Foreign Trade Bank (MFTB), Myanmar
RBI/2014-15/509
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 86
March 23, 2015
To
All Category - I Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam / Sir,
Exim Bank's Line of Credit of USD 198.96 million
to the Myanma Foreign Trade Bank (MFTB), Myanmar
Export-Import Bank of India (Exim Bank) has entered  into an Agreement dated December 11, 2013 with the Myanma Foreign Trade Bank (MFTB), Republic of Union of Myanmar, for making available to the latter,  a Line of Credit (LOC) of USD 198.96 million (USD One Hundred and Ninety Eight  Million and Nine Hundred and Sixty Thousand) for financing 18 irrigation  projects (16 ongoing and 2 rehabilitation) in Republic of Union of Myanmar. The  goods, machinery, equipment and services including consultancy services from India  for exports under this Agreement are those which are eligible for export under  the Foreign Trade Policy of the Government of India and whose purchase may be  agreed to be financed by the Exim Bank under this Agreement. Out of the total  credit by Exim Bank under this Agreement, the goods and services including  consultancy services of the value of at least 50 per cent of the contract price  shall be supplied by the seller from India and the remaining 50 percent goods  and services may be procured by the seller for the purpose of eligible contract  from outside India.
2. The Credit Agreement under the LOC is  effective from February 26, 2015. Under the LOC, the last date for opening of letters  of credit and disbursement will be 48 months from the scheduled completion date  of contract in the case of project exports and 72 months (December 10, 2019)  from the execution date of the Credit Agreement in the case of other supply  contracts.
3. Shipments  under the LOC will have to be declared on EDF/ SDF Forms as per instructions  issued by the Reserve Bank from time to time.
4. No agency commission is  payable under the above LOC. However, if required, the exporter may use his own  resources or utilize balances in his Exchange Earners’ Foreign Currency Account  for payment of commission in free foreign exchange. Authorised Dealer Category-  l (AD Category-l) banks may allow such remittance after realization of full  payment of contract value subject to compliance with the prevailing  instructions for payment of agency commission.
5. AD  Category-I banks may bring the contents of this circular to the notice of their  exporter constituents and advise them to obtain full details of the Line of  Credit from the Exim Bank’s office at Centre One, Floor 21, World Trade Centre  Complex, Cuffe Parade, Mumbai 400 005 or  log on to
www.eximbankindia.in
6. The  Directions contained in this circular have been issued under sections 10(4) and  11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA), 1999 (42 of 1999) and are without  prejudice to permissions / approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(A. K. Pandey)
Chief General Manager