(13 kb)
Know Your Customer (KYC) Norms / Anti Money Laundering (AML) Standards/ Combating of Financing of Terrorism (CFT) / Obligations under Prevention of Money-laundering Act (PMLA), 2002 - Money Transfer Service Scheme (MTSS)
RBI/2014-15/514
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 88
March 25, 2015
To
All Authorised Persons, who are Indian Agents  under Money Transfer Service Scheme.
Madam/ Sir,
Know Your Customer (KYC) Norms / Anti Money  Laundering (AML) Standards/ Combating of Financing of Terrorism (CFT) /  Obligations under Prevention of Money-laundering Act (PMLA), 2002 - Money Transfer Service Scheme  (MTSS)
Attention of Authorised Persons (APs), who are  Indian Agents under Money Transfer Service Scheme (MTSS) is invited to  the
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 10 dated July 21, 2014
on the  captioned subject read with
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 68 dated January 28,  2015
on AML/CFT standards.
2. It has been decided that henceforth, Foreign  Exchange Department shall not issue the instructions to the APs who are Indian  Agents under Money Transfer Service Scheme, on the captioned subject separately  and the instructions issued by Department of Banking Regulation, Central  Office, Reserve Bank of India in this regard so far and from time to time in  future, mutatis mutandis, be applicable to all APs.
3. These guidelines will also be applicable,  mutatis mutandis, to all Sub-Agents of the Indian Agents under MTSS and it will  be the sole responsibility of the APs (Indian Agents) to ensure that their  Sub-agents adhere to these guidelines.
4. Authorised Persons (Indian Agents) may bring  the contents of this circular to the notice of their Sub-Agents / constituents  concerned.
5. The directions contained in this Circular  have been issued under Section 10(4) and Section 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange  Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and also under the, Prevention of Money  Laundering Act, (PMLA), 2002, as amended from time to time and are without prejudice  to permission /approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(B. P. Kanungo)
Principal Chief General Manager