(87 kb)
Exim Bank's Line of Credit of USD 2.712 million to the Banco Exterior De Cuba
RBI//2014-15/518
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.89
March 27, 2015
To
All Category - I Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam / Sir,
Exim Bank's Line of Credit of USD 2.712 million to the Banco Exterior De Cuba
Export-Import Bank of India (Exim Bank) has entered  into an Agreement dated September 2, 2014 with the Banco Exterior De Cuba, for making available to the latter, a  Line of Credit (LOC) of USD 2.712 million (USD Two Million and Seven Hundred  and Twelve Thousand) for financing the setting up of a bulk blending fertilizer  plant in the Republic of Cuba. The goods, machinery, equipment and services  including consultancy services from India for exports under this Agreement are  those which are eligible for export under the Foreign Trade Policy of the  Government of India and whose purchase may be agreed to be financed by the Exim  Bank under this Agreement. Out of the total credit by Exim Bank under this  Agreement, the goods and services including consultancy services of the value  of at least 75 per cent of the contract price shall be supplied by the seller  from India and the remaining 25 percent goods and services may be procured by  the seller for the purpose of eligible contract from outside India.
2. The Credit  Agreement under the LOC is effective from February 27, 2015. Under the LOC, the  last date for opening of Letters of Credit and Disbursement will be 48 months  from the scheduled completion date(s) of contract(s) in the case of project exports  and 72 months from the execution date of the Credit Agreement in the case of  supply contracts.
3. Shipments  under the LOC will have to be declared on EDF/ SDF Forms as per instructions  issued by the Reserve Bank from time to time.
4. No agency commission is  payable under the above LOC. However, if required, the exporter may use his own  resources or utilize balances in his Exchange Earners’ Foreign Currency Account  for payment of commission in free foreign exchange. Authorised Dealer Category-  l (AD Category-l) banks may allow such remittance after realization of full  payment of contract value subject to compliance with the prevailing  instructions for payment of agency commission.
5. AD  Category-I  banks may bring the contents of this circular to the notice of their exporter  constituents and advise them to obtain full details of the Line of Credit from the  Exim Bank’s office at Centre One, Floor 21, World Trade Centre Complex, Cuffe  Parade, Mumbai 400 005 or log on to
www.eximbankindia.in
.
6. The  Directions contained in this circular have been issued under sections 10(4) and  11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA), 1999 (42 of 1999) and are without  prejudice to permissions / approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(A. K.     
      K.  Pandey)
Chief General Manager