(111 kb)
Risk Management and Inter-bank Dealings: Revised Guidelines relating
RBI/2014-15/526
A.P.(DIR Series) Circular No. 90
March 31, 2015
To All Category - I Authorised Dealer banks
Madam / Sir,
Risk Management and Inter-bank Dealings: Revised  Guidelines relating to participation of Residents in the Exchange Traded  Currency Derivatives (ETCD) market
Attention of Authorized Dealers Category – I (AD Category – I) banks is  invited to the Foreign Exchange Management (Foreign Exchange Derivative  Contracts) Regulations, 2000 dated May 3, 2000 (
Notification No. FEMA.  25/RB-2000 dated May 3, 2000
), as amended from time to time and
A.P. (DIR  Series) Circular No. 147 dated June 20, 2014
relating to participation of  residents in the ETCD market.
Increase in position limits not requiring  establishment of underlying exposure
2. Presently, domestic participants are allowed to take a long (bought) as  well as short (sold) position upto USD 10 million per exchange. As a measure of  further liberalisation, it has now been decided to increase the limit (long as  well as short) in USD-INR pair upto USD 15 million per exchange. In addition,  domestic participants shall be allowed to take long as well as short positions  in EUR-INR, GBP-INR and JPY-INR pairs, all put together, upto USD 5 million  equivalent per exchange. These limits  shall be monitored by the exchanges and breaches, if any, may be reported. For  the convenience of monitoring, exchanges may prescribe fixed limits for the  contracts in currencies other than USD such that these limits are within the  equivalent of USD 5 million.
Rationalisation of documentation requirements for  both Importers and Exporters
4. At present, in terms of paragraphs (2) (b) (iii) and (2) (b) (v)  respectively, of the above circular, market participants have to produce a  certificate from the statutory auditors as indicated therein. As a measure of  liberalisation in the ETCD market, it has now been decided that, instead of the  statutory auditor’s certificate, a signed undertaking to the same effect from  the Chief Financial Officer (CFO) or the senior most functionary responsible  for company's finance and accounts and the Company Secretary (CS) may be  produced. In the absence of a CS, the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) or the  Chief Operating Officer (COO) shall co-sign the undertaking along with the CFO.
Increase in eligible limit for Importers hedging  contracted exposure
5. At present, importers are permitted to hedge their contracted exposures  in the ETCD market upto 50 per cent of their eligible limit as defined in para  (2)(b)(i) of the above circular. With a  view to bringing at par both exporters and importers, it has now been decided  to allow importers to take appropriate hedging positions up to 100 per cent of  the eligible limit.
6. All other operational guidelines, terms and  conditions including the requirement of certificate(s) from the Statutory  Auditor regarding the eligible limit up to which domestic participants can take  appropriate hedging positions in the ETCD market and the necessary undertaking  from the CFO or senior most functionary responsible for company's finance and  accounts as indicated in para (2)(b)(ii) of the above circular remain  unchanged.
7. A matrix indicating the existing and the revised  positions is
enclosed
for easy reference.
8. This circular has been issued under Sections 10 (4) and 11(1) of the  Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and is without prejudice to  permissions / approvals, if any, required under any other law.
Yours faithfully
(R Subramanian)
Chief General Manager
Encls: As above
Annex to  A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No. 90 dated March 31, 2015
Paragraph    no.
Existing    provision in terms of A.P. (DIR Series) No. 147 dated June 20, 2014
Amended    provision in terms of A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.  90 dated March 31,    2015
(2)(a)
Domestic    participants shall be allowed to take a long (bought) as well as short (sold)    position
upto USD 10 million per exchange
.
Domestic    participants shall be allowed to take a long (bought) as well as short (sold)    position
in USD-INR pair upto USD 15 million per exchange. In addition,    participants shall be allowed to take long as well as short positions in    EUR-INR, GBP-INR and JPY-INR pairs, all put together, upto USD 5 million    equivalent per exchange. These limits shall be monitored by the exchanges and    breaches, if any, may be reported.
(2) (b)    (i)
For participants who are exporters or    importers of goods and services, the eligible limit up to which they can take    appropriate hedging positions in ETCDs will be determined as
(a) higher of    the (I) average of the last three years’ export turnover, or (II) previous    year’s export turnover, in case they are exporters and (b) fifty per cent of    the higher of the (I) average of their last three years’ imports turnover or    (II) the previous year’s turnover, in case they are importers.
For participants who are exporters or    importers of goods and services, the eligible limit up to which they can take    appropriate hedging positions in ETCDs will be determined as
higher of the    (I) average of the last three years’ export or import turnover, or (II)    previous year’s export or import turnover
(2) (b)    (iii)
Based on the above certificate, a trading    member can book ETCD contracts upto fifty per cent of the eligible limit [as at    paragraph (2)(b)(i)] on behalf of the concerned customer. If a participant    wishes to take position beyond the fifty per cent of the eligible limit in    the ETCD, it has to produce a
certificate from the statutory auditors
certifying that the sum total of the outstanding OTC derivative contracts and    outstanding ETCD contracts has generally been in correspondence with the    eligible limits.
Based on the above certificate, a trading    member can book ETCD contracts upto fifty per cent of the eligible limit [as    at paragraph (2)(b)(i)] on behalf of the concerned customer. If a participant    wishes to take position beyond the fifty per cent of the eligible limit in    the ETCD, it has to produce
a
signed undertaking from the Chief Financial Officer (CFO) or the senior most    functionary responsible for company's finance and accounts and the Company    Secretary (CS) to the effect
that    the sum total of the outstanding OTC derivative contracts and outstanding ETCD    contracts has been in correspondence with the eligible limits.
In the absence of a CS, the Chief Executive Officer    (CEO) or the Chief Operating Officer (COO) shall co-sign the undertaking    along with the CFO or the senior most functionary responsible for company's    finance and accounts.
(2) (b)    (v)
All participants in the ETCD market, except    those covered by paragraph (2)(b)(iv), will be required to submit to the    concerned trading member of the exchange a half-yearly
certificate from    their statutory auditors
as on March 31st and September 30th, within    fifteen days from the said dates, to the effect that during the preceding six    months, the derivative contracts entered into by the participant in the OTC    and the ETCD markets put together did not exceed the actual exposure.
All participants in the ETCD market, except    those covered by paragraph (2)(b)(iv), will be required to submit to the    concerned trading member of the exchange a half-yearly
a
signed undertaking from the Chief Financial Officer    (CFO) or the senior most functionary responsible for company's finance and    accounts and the Company Secretary (CS)
as on March 31st and September 30th, within fifteen    days from the said dates, to the effect that during the preceding six months,    the derivative contracts entered into by the participant in the OTC and the    ETCD markets put together did not exceed the actual exposure.
In    the absence of a CS, the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) or the Chief Operating    Officer (COO) shall co-sign the undertaking along with the CFO or the senior    most functionary responsible for company's finance and accounts
.