(72 kb)
Operational guidelines on International Financial Services Centre (IFSC)
RBI/2014-15/530
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.92
March 31, 2015
To
All Category – I Authorised Dealer Banks
Madam/ Sir,
Operational guidelines on  International Financial Services Centre (IFSC)
Attention of Authorised Dealers Category – I (AD  Category - I) banks is invited to the Foreign Exchange Management  (International Financial Services Centre) Regulations 2015 dated March 2, 2015,  a copy of which is at
Annex
.
2. In terms of the above Regulations, a  financial institution or a branch of a financial institution set up in the IFSC  and permitted / recognised as such by the Government or a Regulatory Authority  shall be treated as person resident outside India. Therefore, their transaction  with a person resident in India shall be treated as a transaction between a  resident and non- resident and shall be subject to the provisions of Foreign  Exchange Management Act, 1999 and the Rules/Regulations/Directions issued  thereunder.
3. The financial transaction in this context  shall mean making or receiving payment, drawing, issuing or negotiating any  bills of exchange or promissory note, transferring any security or  acknowledging any debt. Similarly, financial service shall mean any activity  which a financial institution is permitted to carry on by the Respective Act of  the Parliament or Government of India or any Regulatory Authority empowered to  regulate the concerned financial institution.
4 It may be noted that subject to the provisions  of Section 1 (3) of Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999, nothing contained in  any other Regulations shall apply to a financial institution or a branch of a  financial institution set up in an IFSC unless there is some express and  specific provision to that effect in the Foreign Exchange Management  (International Financial Services Centre) Regulations 2015 or the other  Regulations.
5. AD Category – I banks may bring the contents  of this circular to the notice of their constituents and customers concerned.
6. Reserve Bank of India has issued the subject  Notification through the Foreign Exchange Management (International Financial  Services Centre) Regulations, 2015 which have been notified vide
Notification  No.FEMA.339/2015-RB dated March 2, 2015
, vide G.S.R. No. 218(E) dated March  23, 2015.
7. The directions contained in this circular  have been issued under section of 47 Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42  of 1999) and are without prejudice to permissions / approvals, if any, required  under any other law.
Yours faithfully,
(A.K.Pandey)
Chief General Manager