(381 kb)
Prudential Norms on Income Recognition, Asset Classification and Provisioning pertaining to Advances – Refinancing of Exposures to Borrowers
RBI/2014-15/539
DBR.No.BP.BC.85/21.04.048/2014-15
April 6, 2015
All Scheduled Commercial Banks
(Excluding Regional Rural Banks)
Dear Sir,
Prudential Norms on Income Recognition, Asset Classification and  Provisioning pertaining to Advances – Refinancing of Exposures to Borrowers
In terms of
circular  DBOD.No.BP.BC.107/21.04.048/2013-14 dated April 22, 2014
and
A.P. (DIR Series)  Circular No.129 dated May 9, 2014
, Indian companies are not permitted to raise external  commercial borrowings (ECB) from overseas branches / subsidiaries of Indian  banks for the purpose of refinance / repayment of the rupee loans raised from  the domestic banking system.
2. Further, in terms of the  circular dated April 22, 2014, it was advised that utilisation of export  advances, received on the strength of guarantees issued by Indian banks, for  repayment of loans availed of from Indian banks (except in cases where banks  have received approvals under the Foreign Exchange Management Act 1999) is not  in compliance with our instructions. In this connection, in terms of  instructions contained in A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.132 dated May 21, 2014  on ‘Export of Goods - Long Term Export Advances’, eligible exporters were  allowed to receive long term export advance to be utilized for execution of  long term supply contracts for export of goods. Such exporters were also allowed  to use such export advances to liquidate rupee loans which are not classified  as non-performing assets as per the Reserve Bank of India asset classification  norms, subject to certain conditions.
3. In this connection, it  is reiterated that export performance guarantees, where permitted to be issued,  shall strictly be in the nature of performance guarantee
and shall not contain any clauses which may in effect allow such  performance guarantees to be utilised as financial guarantees/Standby Letters  of Credits
.
4. It has been observed  that the facility of long term export advances is primarily being utilised for  refinancing rupee loans of borrowers instead of being used for execution of long term supply contracts for export of  goods. In order to ensure that long  term export advances are used for the intended purpose, it is advised that  while eligible Indian companies may continue to avail of the facilities  available to them under the guidelines mentioned in the above paragraphs,
any repayment/refinancing of rupee loans  with foreign currency borrowings/export advances, where permitted, will be  subject to the following conditions
:
a) If the foreign currency  borrowings/export advances, where permitted under the guidelines issued under  the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of  1999), are obtained from lenders  who are not part of the Indian banking system (Indian banking system would  include all banks in India and overseas branch/subsidiary/joint venture of  Indian banks) without any support from the Indian banking system in the form of  Guarantees/Standby Letters of Credit/Letters of Comfort etc., the same may be utilised  to refinance/repay loans availed from the Indian banking system.
b) If the foreign currency  borrowings/export advances are obtained:
from lenders who are part of Indian banking system  (where permitted); or
with support (where permitted) from the Indian  banking system in the form of Guarantees/Standby Letters of Credit/Letters of  Comfort, etc.;
then, in addition to any applicable  guidelines issued under the Foreign Exchange  Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999), the refinance shall be treated as ‘restructuring’ (and classified/provided  for as per extant prudential norms on income recognition, asset classification  and provisioning), if the above borrowings/export advances are extended to a  borrower who is under financial difficulty and involve concessions that the bank would otherwise  not consider. A non-exhaustive and indicative list of signs of financial  difficulty is
annexed
.
5. It is further advised  that repayment/refinancing of foreign currency borrowings outstanding with a  bank, by way of rupee loans or another foreign currency loan (where permitted) or  based on support (where permitted) in the form of Guarantees/Standby Letters of  Credit/Letters of Comfort, etc. from lenders who are part of Indian banking  system would also be governed by the prudential guidelines stipulated at 4(b) above.
Yours faithfully,
(Sudarshan Sen)
Chief General Manager-in-Charge
Annex
Non-Exhaustive Indicative  List of Signs of Financial Difficulty
Continuous       irregularities in cash credit/overdraft accounts such as inability to       maintain stipulated margin on continuous basis or drawings frequently       exceeding sanctioned limits, periodical interest debited remaining       unrealised;
Repeated undue delay       in making timely payment of instalments of principal and interest on term       loans;
Undue delay in meeting       commitments towards payments of installments due, crystallized liabilities       under LC/BGs, etc.
Continuing inability       to adhere to financial loan covenants;
Failure to pay       statutory liabilities, non- payment of bills to suppliers of raw       materials, water, power, etc.;
Non-submission or       undue delay in submission or submission of incorrect stock statements and       other control statements, delay in publication of financial statements and       excessively qualified financial statements;
Delay in project       implementation;
Downward migration of internal/external ratings/rating  outlook.